Transcript for: College Algebra - Full Course
This video is about the exponent rules, rules
that govern expressions like two to the fifth, or x to the n. two to the fifth is just shorthand for two
times two times two times two times two, written five times. And similarly x to the n is just
x multiplied by itself. And times when we write these expressions, the number
on the bottom that's being multiplied by itself is called the base. And the number at the
top telling us how many times we're multiplying the base by itself is called the exponent. Sometimes the exponent is also called the
power. The product rule says that a 5x to the power
of n times x to the power of m, that's the same thing as x to the n plus m power. In
other words, when I multiply two expressions with the same base, then I can add their exponents. For example, if I have two cubed times two
to the fourth, that's equal to two to the seventh. And that makes sense, because two
cubed times two to the fourth, means I multiply two by itself three times. And then I multiply
that by two multiplied by itself four times. And in the end, I have to multiplied by itself
seven times, which is two to the seventh, I'm just adding up the number of times as
multiplied in each piece, to get the number of times as multiplied total. The quotient rule says that if I have x to
the n power divided by x to the m power, that's equal to x to the n minus m power. In other
words, if I divide two expressions with the same base, then I can subtract their exponents. For example, three to the six divided by three
squared is going to be three to the six minus two, or three to the fourth. And this makes
sense, because three to the six means I multiply three by itself six times, and then I divide
that by three multiplied by itself twice. So when I cancel out threes, I have four threes
left, notice that I have to subtract the number
of threes on the bottom, from the number of threes at the top to get my number of threes
remaining. That's why subtract my exponents. The power rule tells us if I have x to the
n power raised to the m power, that's the same thing as x to the n times M power. In
other words, when I raise a power to a power, I get to multiply the exponents. For example, five to the fourth cubed is equal
to five to the four times three, or five to the 12th. And this makes sense, because five
to the fourth cubed can be thought of as five to the fourth times five to the fourth, times
five to the fourth, expanding this out some more, that's five times five times five times
five times the same thing times the same thing again. So I have three groups of four, or five, which
is a total of three times four, or 12. fives. The next rule involves what happens when I
raise a number, or a variable to the zeroeth power, it turns out that anything to the zeroeth
power is equal to one. Usually, this is just taken as a definition.
But here's why it makes sense to me. If you have something like two cubed divided
by two cubed, Well, certainly that has to equal one, anything divided by itself is just
one. But using the quotient rule, we know that this is the same thing as two
to the three minus three, because when we divide two things with the same base, we get
to subtract their exponents. Therefore, this is the same thing as two to the zero. So two
to the zero has to equal one in order to make it work with the quotient rule. And the same argument shows that anything
to the zero power has to be equal to one. What happens when we take something to a negative
power, x to the n is equal to one over x to the n.
Again, most people just take this as a definition of a negative exponent. But here's why it
makes sense. If I take something like five to seven times
five to the negative seven, then buy the product roll the SAS to equal five to the seven plus
negative seven, which is five to the zero, and we just said that that is equal to one. Now I have the equation of five to the seventh
times five to the negative seventh equals one, if I divide both sides by five, the seventh,
I get that five to the negative seventh has to equal one over five to the seventh. So
that's where this rule about negative exponents comes from. That has to be true in order to
be consistent with the product rule. Finally, let's look at a fractional exponents.
What does an expression like x to the one over N really mean? Well, it means the nth
root of x, for example, 64 to the 1/3 power means the cube root of 64, which happens to
be four, and nine to the one half means the square root of nine, which is usually written
without that little superscript up there. Now, the square root of nine is just three. fractional exponents also makes sense. For
example, if I have five to the 1/3, and I cube that, then by the power role, that's
equal to five to the 1/3, times three, which is just five to the one or five. So
in other words, five to the 1/3, is the number that when you cube it, you get five. And that's
exactly what's meant by the cube root of five, the cube root of five is also a number that
when you cube it, you get five. The next rule tells us we can distribute an
exponent over a product. In other words, if we have a product, x times
y, all raised to the nth power, that's equal to x to the n times y to the N. For example, five times seven, all raised to the third power is equal to
five cubed times seven cubed. And this makes sense, because five times seven, all raised
to the cube power can be expanded as five times seven, times five times seven, times
five times seven. But if I rearrange the order of multiplication, this is the same thing
as five times five times five, times seven times seven times seven, or five cubed times
seven cubed. Similarly, we could distribute an exponent
over a quotient, if we have the quotient X over Y, all raised to the n power, that's
the same as x to the n over y to the N. For example, two sevenths raised to the fifth
power is the same thing as two to the fifth over seven to the fifth. This makes sense,
because two sevens to the fifth can be expanded as two sevens multiply by itself five times,
which can be written rewritten as two multiplied by itself five times divided by seven multiplied
by itself five times, and that's two to the fifth, over seven to the fifth, as wanted. We've seen that we can distribute an exponent over multiplication, and division. But be careful, because we cannot distribute
next bowknot. over addition, or subtraction, for example,
a plus b to the n is not generally equal to a to the n plus b to the n, a minus b to the
n is not generally equal to a to the n minus b to the n. And if you're not sure, just try
an example with numbers. For example, two plus three squared is not
the same thing as two squared plus three squared, and two minus three squared is definitely
not equal to two squared minus three squared. In this video, I gave eight exponent rules,
which I'll list again here. There's the product rule, the quotient rule, the power rule, the zero exponent, the negative exponent,
the fractional exponent, and the two rules involving distributing exponents. Across multiplication, and division. In another video, I'll use these exponent
rules to rewrite and simplify expressions involving exponents. In this video, I'll work out some examples
of simplifying expressions using exponent rules. I'll start by reviewing the exponent rules. The product rule says that when you multiply
two expressions with the same base, you add the exponents. The quotient rule says that
when you divide two expressions with the same base, you subtract the exponents. The power
rule says that when you take a power to a power, you multiply the exponents. The power
of zero rule says that anything to the zero power is one, as long as the base is not zero. Since zero to the zero is undefined, it doesn't
make sense. negative exponents to evaluate x to the minus
n, we take the reciprocal one over x to the n. To evaluate a fractional exponent, like
x to the one over n, we take the nth root of x, we can distribute an exponent over a product,
a times b to the n is equal to A to the N times b to the n. And we can distribute an
exponent over a quotient a over b to the n is a to the n over b to the n. In the rest of this video, we'll use these
exponent rules to simplify expressions. For our first example, we want to simplify
three times x to the minus two divided by x to the fourth, there's several possible
ways to proceed. For example, we could use the negative exponent
rule dr x to the minus two as one over x squared, all that gets divided by x to the fourth,
still, notice that we only take the reciprocal of
the x squared, the three stays where it is. And that's because the exponent of negative
two only applies to the x not to the three. Now if we think of three as three over one,
we have a product of two fractions and our numerator. And so we evaluate that by taking
the product of the numerators times the product of the denominators, which is three over x
squared, all divided by x to the fourth, I can think of x to the fourth as x to the
fourth over one. So now I have a fraction of a fraction, which I can evaluate by multiplying
by the reciprocal, that simplifies to three times one divided by x squared times x to
the fourth, which is three over x to the six, using the product rule. Since x squared times
x to the fourth is equal to x to the two plus four, or x to the six. An alternate way of solving this problem is to start by using the quotient rule, I can rewrite this as three times x to the
minus two over x to the fourth, and by the quotient rule, that's three times x to the
minus two minus four, or three times x to the minus six. Now using the negative exponent roll, x to
the minus six is one over x to the six. And this product of fractions simplifies to three
over x to the six, the same answer I got before. The second problem can be solved in similar
ways. Please pause the video and try it before going on. One way to simplify would be to use the negative
exponent rule first, and rewrite y to the minus five as one over wide the fifth. thinking of this as a fraction, divided by
a fraction, I can multiply by the reciprocal and get four y cubed y to the fifth over one
by the product rule. The numerator here is four y to the eight. And so my final answer
is just for one of the eight. Alternatively, I could decide to use the quotient
rule first. As in the previous problem, I can write this
as for y cubed minus negative five by the quotient rule. And so that's for y to the
eighth as before. I'd like to show you one more method to solve
these two problems, kind of a shortcut method before we To go on, that shortcut relies on the principle
that a negative exponent in the numerator corresponds to a positive exponent in the
denominator. For example, the x to the negative two in the numerator here, after some manipulations
became an X to the positive two in the denominator. Furthermore, a negative exponent in the denominator is equivalent to a positive exponent in the
numerator. That's what happened when we had the y to
the negative five in the denominator, and translated into a y to the positive five in
the numerator. Sometimes people like to talk about this principle,
by saying that you can pass a factor across the fraction bar by switching the sine of the exponent that
is making a positive exponent negative, or a negative exponent positive. Let's see how this principle gives us a shortcut
for solving these two problems. In the first problem, 3x to the minus two
over x to the four, we can move the negative exponent in the numerator and make it a positive
exponent the denominator, so we get three over x to the four plus two or x to the six. In the second example, for y cubed over y
to the minus five, we can change the Y to the minus five in the denominator into a y
to the five in the numerator and get our final answer of four y to the three plus five or
eight. We'll use this principle again in the next
problems. In this example, notice that I have I have
y's in the numerator and the denominator, and also Z's in the numerator and the denominator.
In order to simplify, I'm going to try to get all my y's either in the numerator or
the denominator. And similarly for the Z's. Since I have more y's in the denominator,
let me move this y to the three downstairs and make it a y to the negative three. I'm
using the principle here that a positive exponent in the numerator corresponds to a negative
exponent in the denominator. Now since I have a positive exponent, z in
the numerator and a negative exponent denominator, and I want to get rid of negative exponents,
I'm going to pass the Z's to the numerator as e to the minus two in the denominator,
it comes as e to the plus two in the numerator. Notice that my number seven doesn't move.
And when I do any of these manipulations, because it doesn't have an exponent, and the
exponent of negative two, for example, only applies to the Z not to the seven. Now that I've got all my Z's in the numerator
and all my y's in the denominator, it's easy to clean this up using the product rule. And I have my simplified expression. In this last example, we have a complicated
expression raised to a fractional power. I'm going to start by simplifying the expression
inside the parentheses. I can bring all my y's downstairs and all
my x's upstairs and get rid of negative exponents at the same time. In other words, I can rewrite this as 25x
to the fourth, I'll bring the Y to the minus five downstairs
and make it y to the fifth on the denominator, bring the x to the minus six upstairs and
make it x to the sixth the numerator, and then I still have the Y cubed on the denominator,
all that's raised to the three halves power. Using the product rule, I can rewrite the
expression on the inside of the parentheses as 25x to the 10th over y to the eighth. Recall that we're allowed to distribute an
exponent across a product or across a quotient. When I distribute my three halves power, I get 25 to the three halves times x to the
10th to the three halves divided by y to the eighth to the three halves. Now the power rule tells me when I have a
power to a power, I get to multiply the exponents. So I can rewrite this as 25 to the three halves
times x to the 10 times three halves of our y to the eight times three halves. In other
words, 25 to the three halves times x to the 15th over y to the 12th. Finally, I need to
rewrite 25 to the three halves. Since three halves can be thought of as three times one
half, or as one half times three, I can write 25 to the three halves as 25 to the three
times one half, or as 25 to the one half times three. Well, using the power rule in reverse, I can
think of this as 25 cubed to the one half, or as 25 to the one half cubed. Since when
I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponents 25 cubed to the one half might be hard to
evaluate, since 25 cubed is a huge number, but 25 to the one half is just the square
root of 25. So I have the square root of 25 cubed, or five cubed, which is 125. Therefore, my original expression is going
to be 120 5x to the 15 over y to the 12th. In this video, we use the exponent rules to
simplify complicated expressions. This video goes through a few tricks for simplifying
expressions with radicals in them. Recall that this notation means the nth root
of x, so this notation here means the cube root of eight, the number that when you cube
it, you get eight, that number would be two, when we write the root sign without a little
number, that just means the square root so the two is implied. In this case, the square root of 25 is five
since five squared is 25. Let's start by reviewing some rules for radical
expressions. First, if we have the radical of a product, we can rewrite that as the product
of two radicals. For example, the square root of nine times
16 is the same thing as the square root of nine times the square root of 16, you can
check that both of these evaluate to 12. Similarly, it's possible to distribute a radical
sine across division, the radical of a divided by b is the same thing as the radical of A
divided by the radical of B. For example, the cube root of 64 over eight is the same
thing as the cube root of 64 over the cube root of eight, and you can check that both
of these evaluated to you have to be a little bit careful though,
because it's not okay to distribute a radical sign across addition. In general, the nth
root of a plus b is not equal to the nth root of A plus the nth root of b. And similarly,
it's not okay to distribute a radical across subtraction. If you're ever in doubt, you can always check
with simple examples. For example, the square root of one plus one is not the same thing
as the square root of one plus the square root of one, the right side evaluates to one plus one or
two, and the left side is square root of two and the irrational number. The second expression to show that that fails,
I don't think it'll work to use the square root of one minus one it'll actually hold
in that case, but I can show it's false by using say the square root of two minus one,
which does not equal the square root of two minus the square root of one. You might notice that these Rules for Radicals,
the ones that hold and the ones that don't hold, remind you of rules for exponents. And
that's no coincidence. Because radicals can be written in terms of exponents. For example,
if we look at the first rule, we can rewrite this, the nth root of A times B is the same
thing as the one of our nth power. And by exponent rules, I can distribute an exponent
across multiplication. And so this radical rule can be restated completely in terms of
an exponent rule. Similarly, the second rule can be restated in terms of exponents as a
or b to the one over n is equal to A to the one over n divided by b to the one over n.
We can use the relationship between radicals and the exponents to rewrite a to the m over
n. a to the m over N is the same thing as a to the m with the N through taken. That's
also the same thing As the nth root of A, all taken to the nth
power to see whether that's true, think about exponent rules. So a to the m over N is the
same thing as a to the m, taken to the one over nth power. That's because when we take
a power to a power, we multiply exponents, and M times one over n is equal to M over
n. But a one over nth power is the same thing
as an nth root. And therefore, this expression is the same thing as this expression. And
that proves the first equivalence. The second equivalence can we prove similarly, by writing
a to the m over n as a to the one over n times M. Again, this is works because when I take
the power to the power, I'm multiply exponents, one over n times M is the same thing as M
over n. But now, these two expressions are the same, because the one over nth power is
the same as the nth root. One mnemonic for remembering these relationships
is flower over root. So flour is like power, and root is like root, so that tells us we
can write a fractional exponent, the M becomes the power, and the n becomes the root in either
of these two orders. Now let's use these rules in some examples.
If we want to compute 25 to the negative three halves power, well, first I'll use my exponent
rule to rewrite that negative exponent as one over 25 to the three halves power. Next, I'll use the power of a root mnemonic
to rewrite this as 25 to the third power square rooted, or, as 25 square rooted to the third
power. I wrote the two's there for the square root
for emphasis, but most of the time, people will omit this and just write the square root
without a little number there. Now, I could use either of these two equivalent
expressions to continue, but I'd rather use this one because it's easier to compute without
a calculator. The square root of 25 is just five, five cubed is 125. So my answer is one
over 125. If I tried to compute the cube of 25, first,
I'd get a huge number. In general, it's usually easier to compute the route before the power
when you're working without a calculator. Now let's do an example simplifying a more
complicated expression with with exponent cynet. I want to take the square root of all
this stuff. And since I don't really like negative exponents, I'm first going to rewrite
this as the square root of 60x squared y to the sixth over z to the 11th. So I'll change
that negative exponent to a positive exponent by moving this, this factor to the denominator. Now, when you're asked to simplify radical
expression, that generally means to pull as much as possible, out of the radical side. To pull things out of the square root side,
I'm going to factor my numbers and try to rewrite everything in terms of squares as
much as possible. Since the square root of a square, those two operations undo each other.
So I'll show you what I mean first, our factor 60. So 60 is going to be two squared times
three times five. And I'll just copy everything over for now. Now I'll break things up into squares as much
as possible. So I've got a two squared, and three times five, I've already got an x squared,
I write the wider the six as y squared times y squared times y squared. And I'll write
the Z to the 11th as z squared times z squared, I guess five times 12345 times when extra
z, that should add up to z to the 11th. I add all those exponents together. Now I know that I can distribute my radical
sign across multiplication and division. So I'll write this with a zillion different radicals
here. And every time I see the square root of something
squared, I can just cancel those square roots and the squares out and get what's what's
left here. So So after doing that cancellation, I get two times the square root of three times
five times x times y times y times y over z times itself, I guess five times times the
square root of z. And now I can clean that up with exponents. I'll write that as the
square root of 15 I guess two times a squared of 15 times x times y cubed over z to the fifth
the square root of z. I'm gonna leave this example as is. But sometimes
people prefer to rewrite radical expressions without radical signs in the denominator.
That's called rationalizing the denominator. I won't do it here, but I'll show you how
to do it in the next example. This example asks us to rationalize the denominator,
that means to rewrite as an equivalent expression without radical signs in the denominator. To get rid of the radical sine and the denominator,
I want to multiply my denominator by square root of x. But I can't just multiply the denominator
willy nilly by something unless I multiply the numerator by the same thing. So then just
multiply my expression by one in a fancy forum and I don't change the value of my expression. Now, if I just multiply together numerators
3x squared of x and multiply denominators squared of x 10 squared of x is the square
root of x squared squared of x squared is just x. Now I can cancel my access from the numerator
denominator, and my final answer is three times the square root of x. I rationalize
my denominator, and the process got a nicer looking expression. In this video, we went over the Rules for
Radicals. And we simplified some radical expressions by working with fractional exponents, pulling things out of the radical sign and rationalizing the denominator. This video goes over some common methods of
factoring. Recall that factoring an expression means to write it as a product. So we could
factor the number 30, by writing it as six times five, we could factor it more completely
by writing it as two times three times five. As another example, we could factor the expression
x squared plus 5x plus six by writing it as x plus two times x plus three. In this video, I'll go over how I get from
here to here, how I know how to do the factoring. But for right now, I just want to review how
I can go backwards how I can check that the factoring is correct. And that's just by multiplying
out or distributing. If I distribute x plus two times x plus three, then I multiply x
by x, that gives me x squared, x times three gives me 3x. Two times x gives me 2x. And
two times three gives me six. So that simplifies to x squared plus 5x plus six, which checks
out with what I started with. So you can think of factoring as the opposite of distributing
out. And you can always check your factoring by distributing or multiplying out a bit of terminology, when I think of an expression
as a sum of a bunch of things, then the things I sum up are called the terms. But if I think
of the same expression as a product of things, then the things that I multiply together are
called factors. Now let's get started on techniques of factoring.
When I have to factor something, I always like to start by pulling out the greatest
common factor, the greatest common factor means the largest thing that divides each
of the terms. In this first example, the largest thing that
divides both 15 and 25x is five. So the GCF is five. So I pull the five out,
and then I divide each of the terms by that number. And so I get three plus 5x. Pause the video for a moment and see if you
can find the greatest common factor of x squared y and y squared x cubed. The biggest thing that divides both x squared
y and y squared x cubed is going to be x squared times y. One way to find this is to look for the power
of x that smallest in each of these terms. So that's x squared. And the power of y that
smallest in each of these terms is just y to the one or y. Now if I factor out the x squared y from each
of the terms, that's like dividing each term by x squared y, if I divide the first term
by x squared y, I just get one. If I divide the second term by x squared y, I'm going
to be left with an X and a Y. I'll write this out on the side just to make it more clear,
y squared x cubed over x squared y. That's like two y's on the end. Three x's on the top and two x's and a y on
the bottom. So I'm left with just an X and a Y. So I'll write the x, y here, and I factored
my expression. As always, I can check my answer by multiplying out. So if I multiply out my
factored expression, I get x squared y is the first term and the second term, I get
x there. Now let's see three X's multiplied together and two y's multiplied together.
And that checks out with what I started with. The next technique of factoring, I'd like
to go over his factoring by grouping. In this example, notice that we have four terms, factoring
by grouping is a handy method to look at. If you have four terms in your expression,
you need to factor in order to factor by grouping, I'm first
going to factor out the greatest common factor of the first two terms, and then separately,
factor out the greatest common factor of the last two terms. The greatest common factor
of x cubed, and 3x squared is x squared. So I factor out the x squared, and I get x plus
three. And now the greatest common factor of forex and 12 is just four. So I factor
out the four from those two terms. Notice that the factor of x plus three now
appears in both pieces. So I can factor out the greatest common factor of x plus three,
and I'll factor it out on the left side instead of the right. And now I have an x squared
from this first piece, and I have a four from this second piece. And that completes my factoring
by grouping. You might wonder if we could factor further by factoring the expression
x squared plus four. But in fact, as we'll see later, this expression, which is a sum
of two squares, x squared plus two squared does not factor any further over the integers. Next, we'll do some factoring of quadratics.
a quadratic is an expression with a squared term, just a term with x in it, and a constant term
with no x's in it. I'd like to factor this expression as a product
of x plus or minus some number times x plus or minus some other number. The key idea is that if I can find those two
numbers, then if I were to distribute out this expression, those two numbers would have
to multiply to give me my constant term of eight. And these two numbers would end up
having to add to give me my negative six, because when I multiply out, this number will
be a coefficient of x, and this number will be also another coefficient of x, they'll
add together to the negative six. So if I look at all the pairs of numbers that
multiply together to give me eight, so that could be one and eight, two, and four, four
and two, but that's really the same thing as I had before. And that's sort of the same
thing I had before. I shouldn't forget the negatives, I could have negative one, negative
eight, or I could have negative two, negative four, those alternate multiply together to
give me eight. Now I just have to find, see if there's a pair of these numbers that add
to negative six, and it's not hard to see that these ones will work. So now I can write
out my factoring as that would be x minus two times x minus four. And it's always a
good idea to check by multiplying out, I'm going to get x squared minus 4x minus 2x,
plus eight. And that works out to just what I want. Now this second examples a bit more
complicated, because now my leading coefficient, my coefficient of x squared is not just one,
it's the number 10. Now, there are lots of different methods for
approaching a problem like this. And I'm just going to show you one method, my favorite
method that uses factoring by grouping, but but to start out, I'm going to multiply my
coefficient of x squared by my constant term, so I'm multiplying 10 by negative six, that
gives me negative 60. And I'll also take my coefficient of x the number 11. And write
that down here. Now I'm going to look for two numbers that multiply to give me negative
60. And add to give me 11. You might notice that this is exactly what we were doing in
the previous problem. It's just here, we didn't have to multiply the coefficient of x squared
by eight, because the coefficient of x squared was just one. So to find the two numbers that
multiply to negative 60 and add to 11, you might just be able to come up with them in
your head thinking about it, but if not, you can figure it out. Pretty simple. thematically by writing out all the factors,
pairs of factors that multiply to negative 60. So I can start with negative one and 60,
negative two and 30, negative three and 20. And keep going like this until I have found
factors that actually add together to give me the number 11. And, and now that I look
at it, I've already found them. 15 minus four, gives me 11. So I don't have to continue with
my chart of factors. Now, once I found those factors, I write out my expression 10x squared,
but instead of writing 11x, I write negative 4x plus 15x. Now I copy down the negative
six, notice that negative 4x plus 15x equals 11x. That's how I chose those numbers. And
so this expression is evaluates is the same as, as this expression, I haven't changed
my expression. But I have turned it into something that I can apply factoring by grouping on
Look, I've got four terms here. And so if I factor out my greatest common factor of
my first two terms, that's let's see, I think it's 2x. So I factor out the 2x, I get 5x
minus two, and then I factor out the greatest common factor of 15x and negative six, that
would be three, and I get a 5x minus two, again, this is working beautifully. So I have
a 5x minus two in each part. And so I put the 5x minus two on the right, and I put what's
left from these terms in here. So that's 2x plus three. And I have factored my expression. There are a couple special kinds of expressions
that appear frequently, that it's handy to just memorize the formula for. So the first
one is the difference of squares. If you see something of the form a squared minus b squared,
then you can factor that as a plus b times a minus b. And let's just check that that
works. If I do a plus b times a minus b and multiply that out, I get a squared minus a
b plus b A minus B squared, and those middle two terms cancel out. So it gives me back
the difference of squares just like I want it. So for this first example, I if I think
of x squared minus 16 as x squared minus four squared, then I can see that's a difference
of squares. And I can immediately write it as x plus four times x minus four. And the
second example, nine p squared minus one, that's the same thing as three p squared minus
one squared. So that's three p plus one times three p minus one. Notice that if I have a sum of squares, for example, x squared plus four, which is x squared plus
two squared, then that does not factor. The difference of squares formula doesn't
apply. And there is no formula that applies for a sum of squares. There is, however, a
formula for both a difference of cubes and a sum of cubes. The difference of cubes formula,
a cubed minus b cubed is a minus b times a squared plus a b plus b squared. The formula
for the sum of cubes is pretty much the same, you just switch the negative and positive
sign here in here. So that gives us a plus b times a squared minus a b plus b squared.
As usual, you can check these formulas by multiplying out. Let's look at one example
of using these formulas. Y cubed plus 27 is actually a sum of two cubes because it's y
cubed plus three cubed. So I can factor it using the sum of cubes formula by plugging
in y for a and three for B. That gives me y plus three times y squared minus y times
three plus three squared. And I can clean that up a little bit to read y plus three
times y squared minus three y plus nine. So in this video, we went over several methods
of factoring. We did factoring out the greatest common factor. We did factoring by grouping.
We did factoring quadratics. And we did a difference of squares. And we did a difference
and a psalm of cubes and more complicated problems, you may need
to apply several these techniques in order to get through a single problem. For example,
you might need to start by pulling out a greatest common factor and then Add to a factoring of quadratics, or something
similar. Now go forth and factor. This video gives some additional examples
of factoring. Please pause the video and decide which of these first five expressions factor
and which one does not. The first expression can be factored by pulling
out a common factor of x from each term. So that becomes x times x plus one. The second example can be factors as a difference
of two squares, since x squared minus 25 is something squared, minus something else squared.
And we know that anytime we have something like a squared minus b squared, that's a plus
b times a minus b. So we can factor this as X plus five times x minus five. The third one is a sum of two squares, there's
no way to factor a sum of two squares over real numbers. So this is the one that does
not factor. just for completeness, let's look at the next
to this next one does factor by grouping. When we factor by grouping, we pull up the
biggest common factor out of the first two terms, that would be an x squared, that becomes
x squared times x plus two. And then we factor as much as we can add the next two terms,
that would be a three times x plus two. Notice that the x plus two factor now occurs in both
of the resulting terms. So we can pull that x plus two out and get x plus two times x
squared plus three, we can't factor any further because x squared
plus three doesn't factor. Finally, we have a quadratic, this also factors.
And I like to factor these also using a factoring by grouping trick. So first, what I do is
I multiply the coefficient of x squared and the constant term, five times eight is 40.
I'll write that on the top of my x. Now I take the coefficient of the x term, that's
negative 14, and I write that on the bottom part of the x. Now I'm looking for two numbers
that multiply to 40 and add to negative 14. Sometimes I can just guess numbers like this,
but if not, I start writing out factors of 40. So factors of 40, I could do one times
40. Well, now I just noticed, I'm trying to add to a negative number. So if I use two
positive factors, there's no way there's going to add to a negative number. It's better for
me to use negative numbers, that factor 40, a negative times a negative still multiplies
to 40. But they have a chance of adding to a negative number. So but negative one and
negative 40, of course, don't work, they don't add to negative 14, they add to negative 41.
So let me try some other factors. The next biggest number that divides 40, besides one
is two, so I'll try negative two and negative 20. Those add to negative 22. That doesn't
work. Next one that divides 40 would be four, so I'll try negative four and negative 10.
Aha, we have a winner. So negative four plus negative 10 is negative 14, negative four
times negative 10 is positive 40. We've got it. Alright, so the next step is to use factoring
by grouping, we're going to first split up this negative 14x as negative 4x minus 10x.
And carry down the eight and the 5x squared. Notice that this works, because I picked negative
four and negative 10 to add up to negative 14, so so negative 4x minus 10x, will add
up to negative 14x. So I've got the same expression, just just expand it out a little bit. Now
I have four terms, I can do factoring by grouping, so I can group the first two terms and factor
out the biggest thing I can that will be n x times 5x minus four. And now I'll factor
the biggest thing I can out of these two numbers, including the the negative. So that becomes,
let's see, I can factor out a negative two and that becomes 5x minus four since negative
two times minus four is eight. All right, I've got the same 5x plus four in both my
terms, so factoring by grouping is going swimmingly, I can factor out the 5x minus four from both
those terms and I get the x minus two, and I factored this quadratic. If I want to, of
course, I can always check my work by distributing out by multiplying out. So a check here would
be multiplying 5x times x is 5x. squared 5x minus 10 to minus two is minus
10x minus four times x is minus 4x. And minus four times minus two is plus eight. So let's
see, this does check out to exactly what it should be. So that was the method of factoring
a quadratic. And all of these factors except for the sum
of squares. So we saw that factoring by grouping is handy
for factoring this expression here. It was also handy for factoring the quadratic indirectly,
after splitting up the middle term into two terms. So how can you tell when a
an expression is is appropriate to factor by grouping, there's, there's an easy way
to tell that it might be a candidate, and that's that it has four terms. So if you see four terms, or in the case of
quadratic, you can split it up into four terms, then that's a good candidate for factoring
by grouping because you can group the first two terms group the second two terms, factoring
by grouping all always work on, on expressions with four terms. But, but that's like the
first thing to look for. So let's just review what are the same main techniques of factoring.
We saw these on the previous page, we saw there was pull out common factors. There's
difference of squares. There's factoring by grouping. There's factoring quadratics. And one more that I didn't mention is factoring
sums and differences of cubes. that uses the formulas, aq minus b cubed is
a minus b times a squared plus a b plus b squared. And a cubed plus b cubed is a plus
b times a squared minus a b plus b squared. One important tip when factoring, I always recommend doing this first, pull
out the common factors first. That'll simplify things and making the rest
of factoring easier. One more tip is that you might need to do several these factoring
techniques in one problem, for example, you might have to first pull out a common
factor, then factor a difference of squares. And then you might notice that one of your
factors is itself a difference of squares, and you have to apply a difference of squares
again, so don't stop when you factor a little bit, keep factoring as far as you can go. Here are some extra examples of factoring
quadratics. For you to practice, please pause the video and give these a try. For the first one, let's multiply two times
negative 14. That gives us negative 28. And then we'll bring the three down in the bottom
of the x. Now we're looking for two numbers that multiply to negative 28 and add to three.
Well, to multiply two numbers to get a negative 28, we'll need one of them to be negative
and one of them to be positive. So to be one, negative 128, or one, negative 28, those don't
work. Let's see negative 214 or two, negative 14, those don't work. Hey, I just noticed
the positive number had better be bigger than the negative number, so they add to a positive
number. Let's see what comes next. How about negative four times seven, four times negative
seven, I think four, negative four times seven will work. So I'll write those here at negative
four, seven, copy down the two z squared. And I'll split
up the three z into negative four z plus seven z and then minus 14. Now factoring by grouping,
pull out a to z, that becomes z minus two, pull out a seven and that becomes z minus
two again, looking good. I've got two z plus seven times z minus two as my factored expression. My second expression, I could work at the
same way, drawing my axe and factoring by grouping that kind of thing. But it's actually
going to be easier if I notice first that I can pull out a common factor from all of
my terms, though, that'll make things a lot simpler to deal with. So notice that a five
divides each of these terms, and in fact, I'm going to go ahead and pull out the negative
five because I don't like having negatives in front of my squared term. So I'm going
to pull out a common factor of negative five. Again, it would work if I forgot to do this,
but it would be a lot more complicated. So negative five v squared, this becomes minus,
this becomes plus nine V, since nine times negative five is negative 45. And this becomes
minus 10 cents native 10 times negative five is
positive 50. Now I can start my x and my factoring by grouping, or I can use kind of a shortcut
method, which you may have seen before. So I can just put these here, and then I know
that whatever numbers go here, they're gonna have to multiply to the negative 10. And they're
gonna have to add to the nine. So that would be plus 10, and a minus one will do the trick. Those are all my factoring examples for today.
I hope you enjoy your snow morning and have a chance to spend some time working in ALEKS.
Bye. This video is about working with rational
expressions. A rational expression is a fraction usually with variables in it, something like
x plus two over x squared minus three is a rational expression. In this video, we'll
practice adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing rational expressions and simplifying
them to lowest terms. We'll start with simplifying to lowest terms.
Recall that if you have a fraction with just numbers in it, something like 21 over 45,
we can reduce it to lowest terms by factoring the numerator and factoring the denominator and then canceling common factors. So in this example, the three is cancel, and
our fraction reduces to seven over 15. If we want to reduce a rational expression
with the variables and add to lowest terms, we proceed the same way. First, we'll factor
the numerator, that's three times x plus two, and then factor the denominator. In this case
of factors 2x plus two times x plus two, we could also write that as x plus two squared.
Now we cancel the common factors. And we're left with three over x plus two. Definitely
a simpler way of writing that rational expression. Next, let's practice multiplying and dividing.
Recall that if we multiply two fractions with just numbers in them, we simply multiply the
numerators and multiply the denominators. So in this case, we would get four times two
over three times five or 8/15. If we want to divide two fractions, like in
the second example, then we can rewrite it as multiplying by the reciprocal of the fraction
on the denominator. So here, we get four fifths times three halves, and that gives us 12 tenths.
But actually, we could reduce that fraction to six fifths, we use the same rules when we compute the
product or quotient of two rational expressions with the variables. And then here, we're trying
to divide two rational expressions. So instead, we can multiply by the reciprocal. I call
this flipping and multiplying. And now we just multiply the numerators. And multiply the denominators. It might be tempting at this point to multiply
out to distribute out the numerator and the denominator. But actually, it's better to
leave it in this factored form and factored even more completely. That way, we'll be able
to reduce the rational expression to cancel the common factors. So let's factor even more
the x squared plus x factors as x times x plus one, and x squared minus 16. And that's
a difference of two squares, that's x plus four times x minus four, the denominator is
already fully factored, so we'll just copy it over. And now we can cancel common factors
here and here, and we're left with x times x minus four. This is our final answer. Adding and subtracting fractions is a little
more complicated because we first have to find a common denominator. A common denominator
is an expression that both denominators divided into, it's usually best of the long run to
use the least common denominator, which is the smallest expression that both denominators
divided into. In this example, if we just want a common
denominator, we could use six times 15, which is 90 because both six and 15 divided evenly
into 90. But if we want the least common denominator, the best way to do that is to factor the two
denominators. So six is two times 315 is three times five, and then put together only the
factors we need for Both six and 50 into divider numbers. So if
we just use two times three times five, which is 30, we know that two times three will divide
it, and three times five will also divide it. And we won't be able to get a denominator
any smaller, because we need the factors two, three, and five, in order to ensure both these
numbers divided. Once we have our least common denominator, we can rewrite each of our fractions
in terms of that denominator. So seven, six, I need to get a 30 in the denominator, so
I'm going to multiply that by five over five, and multiply by the factors that are missing
from the current denominator in order to get my least common denominator of 30. For the
second fraction, for 15th 15 times two is 30. So I'm going to multiply by two over two, I can rewrite this as 3530 s minus 8/30. And
now that I have a common denominator, I can just subtract my two numerators. And I get
27/30. If I factor, I can reduce this to three squared over two times five, which
is nine tenths. The process for finding the sum of two rational expressions with variables
in them follows the exact same process. First, we have to find the least common denominator,
I'll do that by factoring the two denominators. So 2x plus two factors as two times x plus
1x squared minus one, that's a difference of two squares. So that's x plus one times
x minus one. Now for the least common denominator, I'm going to take all the factors, I need
to get an expression that each of these divides into, so I need the factor two, I need the
factor x plus one, and I need the factor x minus one, I don't have to repeat the factor
x plus one I just need to have at one time. And so I will get my least common denominator
two times x plus one times x minus one, I'm not going to bother multiplying this out,
it's actually better to leave it in factored form to help me simplify later. Now I can
rewrite each of my two rational expressions by multiplying by whatever's missing from
the denominator in terms of the least common denominator. So what I mean is, I can rewrite
three over 2x plus two, I'll write the 2x plus two is two times x plus one, I'll write
it in factored form. And then I noticed that compared to the least common denominator,
I'm missing the factor of x minus one. So I multiply the numerator and the denominator
by x minus one, I just need it in the denominator. But I can't get away with just multiplying
by the denominator without changing my expression, I have to multiply by it on the numerator
and the denominator. So I'm just multiplying by one and a fancy form and not changing the
value here. So now I do the same thing for the second rational expression, I'll I'll
write the denominator in factored form to make it easier to see what's missing from
the denominator. What's missing in this denominator, compared to my least common denominator is
just the factor two, so multiply the numerator and the denominator by two. Now I can rewrite
everything. So the first rational expression becomes three times x minus one over two times
x plus 1x minus one, and the second one becomes five times two over two times x plus 1x minus
one, notice that I now have a common denominator. So I can just add together my numerators.
So I get three times x minus one plus 10 over two times x plus 1x minus one. I'd like to
simplify this. And the best way to do that is to leave the denominator in factored form.
But I do have to multiply out the numerator so that I can add things together. So I get
3x minus three plus 10 over two times x plus 1x minus one, or 3x plus seven over two times
x plus 1x minus one. Now 3x plus seven doesn't factor. And there's therefore no factors that
I can cancel out. So this is already reduced. As much as it can be. This is my final answer. In this video, we saw how to simplify rational
expressions to lowest terms by factoring and canceling common factors. We also saw how to multiply rational expressions
by multiplying the numerator and multiplying the denominator, how to divide rational expressions
by flipping and multiplying and how to add and subtract rational expressions by writing
them in terms of the least common denominator This video is about solving quadratic equations.
a quadratic equation is an equation that contains the square of the variable, say x squared,
but no higher powers of x. The standard form for a quadratic equation
is the form a x squared plus b x plus c equals zero, where A, B and C represent real numbers. And a is not zero
so that we actually have an x squared term. Let me give you an example. 3x squared plus
7x minus two equals zero is a quadratic equation in standard form, here a is three, B is seven,
and C is minus two. The equation 3x squared equals minus 7x plus two is also a quadratic
equation, it's just not in standard form. The key steps to solving quadratic equations
are usually to write the equation in standard form, and then either factor it or use the quadratic formula, which I'll show
you later in this video. Let's start with the example y squared equals
18 minus seven y. Here our variable is y, and we need to rewrite this quadratic equation
in standard form, we can do this by subtracting 18 from both sides and adding seven y to both
sides. That gives us the equation y squared minus 18 plus seven y equals zero. And I can
rearrange a little bit to get y squared plus seven y minus 18 equals zero. Now I've got
my equation in standard form. Next, I'm going to try to factor it. So I need to look for
two numbers that multiply to negative 18 and add to seven. two numbers that work are nine and negative
two, so I can factor my expression on the left as y plus nine times y minus two equals
zero. Now, anytime you have two quantities that multiply together to give you zero, either
the first quantity has to be zero, or the second quantity has to be zero, or I suppose
they both could be zero. In some situations, this is really handy, because that means that
I know that either y plus nine equals zero, or y minus two equals zero. So I can as my
next step, set my factors equal to zero. So y plus nine equals zero, or y minus two equals
zero, which means that y equals negative nine, or y equals two. It's not a bad idea to check that those answers
actually work by plugging them into the original equation, negative nine squared, does that
equal 18 minus seven times negative nine, and you can work out that it does. And similarly,
two squared equals 18 minus seven times two. In the next example, let's find solutions
of the equation w squared equals 121. This is a quadratic equation, because it's got
a square of my variable W, I can rewrite it in standard form by subtracting 121 from both
sides. Notice that A is equal to one b is equal to
zero because there's no w term, and c is equal to negative 121 in the standard form, a W
squared plus BW plus c equals zero. Next step, I'm going to try to factor this expression.
So since 121, is 11 squared, this is a difference of two squares, and it factors as w plus 11,
times w minus 11 is equal to zero. If I set the factors equal to zero, I get w plus 11 equals zero or w minus 11
equals zero. So w equals minus 11, or w equals 11. In this example, I could have solved the
equation more simply, I could have instead said that if W squared is 121, and then w
has to equal plus or minus the square root of 121. In other words, W is plus or minus
11. If you saw the equation this way, it's important
to remember the plus or minus since minus 11 squared equals 121, just like 11 squared
does. Now let's find the solutions for the equation.
x times x plus two equals seven. Some people might be tempted to say that, oh, if two numbers
multiply to equal seven, then one of them better equal one and the other equals seven
or maybe negative one and negative seven. But that's faulty reasoning in this case,
because x and x plus two don't have to be whole numbers. They could be crazy. fractions or even irrational numbers. So instead,
let's rewrite this equation in standard form. To do that, I'm first going to multiply out.
So x times x is x squared x times two is 2x. That equals seven, and I'll subtract the seven
from both sides to get x squared plus 2x minus seven is zero. Now I'm looking to factor it.
So I need two numbers that multiply to negative seven and add to two, since the only way to
factor negative seven is as negative one times seven or seven times negative one, it's easy
to see that there are no whole numbers that will do will work. So there's no way to factor
this expression over the integers. Instead, let's use the quadratic equation. So we have
our leading coefficient of x squared is one. So A is one, B is two, and C is minus seven.
And we're going to plug that into the equation quadratic equation, which goes x equals negative
b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four, I see all over two different people have different ways of remembering
this formula, I'd like to remember it by seeing it x equals negative b plus or minus the square
root of b squared minus four, I see oh over to a, but you can use any pneumonic you like.
Anyway, plugging in here, we have x equals negative two plus or minus the square root
of two squared minus four times one times negative seven support and remember the negative
seven there to all over two times one. Now two squared is four, and four times one
times negative seven is negative 28. So this whole quantity under the square root sign
becomes four minus negative 28, or 32. So I can rewrite this as x equals negative two
plus or minus the square root of 32, all over two. Since 32, is 16 times two and 16 is a perfect
square, I can rewrite this as negative two plus or minus the square root of 16 times
the square root of two over two, which is negative two plus or minus four times the
square root of two over two. Next, I'm going to split out my fraction as negative two over two plus or minus four
square root of two over two, and then simplify those fractions. This becomes negative one
plus or minus two square root of two. So my answers are negative one plus two square root
of two and negative one minus two square root of two. And if I need a decimal answer for
any reason, I could work this out on my calculator. As our final example, let's find all real
solutions for the equation, one half y squared equals 1/3 y minus two. I'll start as usual
by putting it in standard form. So that gives me one half y squared minus 1/3 y plus two
equals zero, I could go ahead and start trying to factor or use the quadratic formula right
now. But I find fractional coefficients kind of annoying. So I'd like to get rid of them.
By doing what I call clearing the denominator, that means I'm going to multiply the whole
entire equation by the least common denominator. In this case, the least common denominator
is two times three or six. So I'll multiply the whole equation by six have to make sure
I multiplied both sides of the equation, but in this case, six times zero is just zero.
And when I distribute the six, I get three y squared minus two y plus 12 equals zero. Now, I could try to factor this, but I think
it's easier probably just to plunge in and use the quadratic formula. So I get x equals negative B, that's negative
negative two or two, plus or minus the square root of b squared, minus four times a times
c, all over to a. Working out the stuff in a square root sign,
negative two squared is four. And here we have, let's see 144. So this simplifies to x equals to plus or
minus the square root of four minus 144. That's negative 140. All of our sex. Well, if you're
concerned about that negative number under the square root sign, you should be we can't
take the square root of a negative number and get an N get a real number is our answer.
There's no real number whose square is a negative number. And therefore, our conclusion is we
have no real solutions to this quadratic equation. In this video, we solve some quadratic equations
by first writing them in standard form and then Either factoring or using the quadratic formula. In some examples, factoring doesn't work,
it's not possible to factor the equation. But in fact, using the quadratic formula will
always work even if it's also possible to solve it by factoring. So you can't really
lose by using the quadratic formula. It's just sometimes it'll be faster to factor instead. This video is about solving rational equations.
A rational equation, like this one is an equation that has rational expressions in that, in
other words, an equation that has some variables in the denominator. There are several different approaches for
solving a rational equation, but they all start by finding the least common denominator.
In this example, the denominators are x plus three and x, we can think of one as just having
a denominator of one. Since the denominators don't have any factors
in common, I can find the least common denominator just by multiplying them together. My next step is going to be clearing the denominator. By this, I mean that I multiply both sides
of my equation by this least common denominator, x plus three times x, I multiply on the left
side of the equation, and I multiply by the same thing on the right side of the equation. Since I'm doing the same thing to both sides
of the equation, I don't change the the value of the equation. Multiplying the least common
denominator on both sides of the equation is equivalent to multiplying it by all three
terms in the equation, I can see this when I multiply out, I'll rewrite the left side the same as before,
pretty much. And then I'll distribute the right side to get x plus three times x times
one plus x plus three times x times one over x. So I've actually multiplied the least common
denominator by all three terms of my equation. Now I can have a blast canceling things. The
x plus three cancels with the x plus three on the denominator. The here are nothing cancels out because there's
no denominator, and here are the x in the numerator cancels with the x in the denominator. So I can rewrite my expression as x squared
equals x plus three times x times one plus x plus three. Now I'm going to simplify. So I'll leave the x squared alone on this
side, I'll distribute out x squared plus 3x plus x plus three, hey, look, the x squared
is cancel on both sides. And so I get zero equals 4x plus three, so 4x is negative three,
and x is negative three fourths. Finally, I'm going to plug in my answer to check. This
is a good idea for any kind of equation. But it's especially important for a rational equation
because occasionally for rational equations, you'll get what's called extraneous solution
solutions that don't actually work in your original equation because they make the denominator
zero. Now, in this example, I don't think we're going to get any extraneous equations
because negative three fourths is not going to make any of these denominators zero, so
it should work out fine when I plug in. If I plug in, I get this, I can simplify the denominator here, negative three fourths
plus three, three is 12 fourths, as becomes nine fourths. And this is one I'll flip and
multiply to get minus four thirds. So here, I can simplify my complex fraction, it ends
up being negative three nights, and one minus four thirds is negative 1/3. So that all seems
to check out. And so my final answer is x equals negative
three fourths. This next example looks a little trickier.
And it is, but the same approach will work. First off, find the least common denominator.
So here, my denominators are c minus five, c plus one, and C squared minus four c minus
five, I'm going to factor that as C minus five times c plus one. Now, my least common
denominator needs to have just enough factors to that each of these denominators divided
into it. So I need the factor c minus five, I need the factor c plus one. And now I've
already got all the factors I need for this denominator. So here is my least common denominator.
Next step is to clear the denominators. So I do this by multiplying both sides of
the equation by my least common denominator. In fact, I can just multiply each of the three
terms by this least common denominator I went ahead and wrote my third denominator
in factored form to make it easier to see what cancels. Now canceling time dies, this
dies. And both of those factors die. cancelling out the denominator is the whole point of
multiplying by the least common denominator, you're multiplying by something that's big
enough to kill every single denominator, so you don't have to deal with denominators anymore. Now I'm going to simplify by multiplying out. So I get, let's see, c plus one times four
c, that's four c squared plus four c, now I get minus just c minus five, and then over
here, I get three c squared plus three, I can rewrite the minus quantity c minus five
is minus c plus five. And now I can subtract the three c squared
from both sides to get just a C squared over here, and the four c minus c that becomes
a three C. And finally, I can subtract the three from
both sides to get c squared plus three c plus two equals zero. got myself a quadratic equation
that looks like a nice one that factors. So this factors to C plus one times c plus two
equals zero. So either c plus one is zero, or C plus two is zero. So C equals negative
one, or C equals negative two. Now let's see, we need to still check our
answers. Without even going to the trouble of calculating
anything, I can see that C equals negative one is not going to work, because if I plug
it in to this denominator here, I get a denominator zero, which doesn't make sense. So C equals
minus one is an extraneous solution, it doesn't actually satisfy my original equation. And
so I can just cross it right out, C equals negative two. I can go if I go ahead, and that doesn't make
any of my denominators zero. So if I haven't made any mistakes, it should satisfy my original
equation, but, but I'll just plug it in to be sure. And after some simplifying, I get a true statement. So my final answer is C equals negative two.
In this video, we saw the couple of rational equations using the method of finding the
least common denominator and then clearing the denominator, we cleared the denominator by multiplying
both sides of the equation by the least common denominator or equivalently. multiplying each
of the terms by that denominator. There's another equivalent method that some
people prefer, it still starts out the same, we find the least common denominator, but
then we write all the fractions over that least common denominator. So in
this example, we'd still use the least common denominator of x plus three times x. But our
next step would be to write each of these rational expressions over that common denominator
by multiplying the top and the bottom by the appropriate things. So one, in order to get
the common denominator of x plus 3x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom by x plus
three times x, one over x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom just by x plus three
since that's what's missing from the denominator x. Now, if I simplify a little bit, let's say this is x squared over that common
denominator, and here I have just x plus three times x over
that denominator, and here I have x plus three over that common denominator. Now add together
my fractions on the right side, so they have a common denominator. So this is x plus three times x plus x plus
three. And now I have two fractions that have that are equal that have the same denominator,
therefore their numerators have to be equal also. So the next step is to set the numerators
equal. So I get x squared is x plus three times x
plus x plus three. And if you look back at the previous way, we solve this equation,
you'll recognize this equation. And so from here on we just continue as before. When choosing between these two methods, I
personally tend prefer the clear the denominators method,
because it's a little bit less writing, you don't have to get rid of those denominators
earlier, you don't have to write them as many times. But some people find this one a little
bit easier to remember, a little easier to understand either of these methods is fine. One last caution, don't forget at the end,
to check your solutions and eliminate any extraneous solutions. These will be solutions that make the denominators
of your original equations go to zero. This video is about solving radical equations,
that is equations like this one that have square root signs in them, or cube roots or
any other kind of radical. When I see an equation with a square root
in it, I really want to get rid of the square root. But it'll be easiest to get rid of the
square root. If I first isolate the square root. In other words, I want to get the term
with the square root and that on one side of the equation by itself, and everything
else on the other side of the equation. If I start with my original equation, x plus
the square root of x equals 12. And I subtract x from both sides, then that does isolate
the square root term on the left side with everything else on the right. Once I've isolated
the term with the square root, I want to get rid of the square root. And I'll do that by
squaring both sides of my equation. So I'll take the square root
of x equals 12 minus x and square both sides. Now the square root of x squared is just x,
taking the square root and then squaring those operations undo each other to work out 12 minus x squared, write it out
and distribute 12 times 12 is 144 12 times minus x is minus 12x. I get another minus
12x from here. And finally minus x times minus x is positive
x squared. So I can combine my minus 12 x's, that's minus 24x. And now I can subtract x
from both sides to get zero equals 144 minus 25x plus x squared. That's a quadratic equation,
I'll rewrite it in a little bit more standard form here. So now I've got a familiar quadratic equation
with no radical signs left in my equation, I'll just proceed to solve it like I usually
do for a quadratic, I'll try to factor it. So I'm going to look for two numbers that
multiply to 144 and add to minus 25. I know I'm going to need negative numbers to get
to negative 25. And in fact, I'll need two negative numbers. So they still multiply to
a positive number. So I'll start listing some factors of 144, I could have negative one
and a negative 144, negative two, and negative 72, negative four, negative 36, and so on.
Once I've listed out the possible factors, it's not hard to find the two that add to
negative 25. So that's negative nine and negative 16. So now I can factor in my quadratic equation
as x minus nine times x minus 16 equals zero, that means that x minus nine is zero or x
minus 16 is zero. So x equals nine or x equals 16. I'm almost done. But there's one last
very important step. And that's to check the Solutions so that we can eliminate any extraneous
solutions and extraneous solution as a solution that we get that does not actually satisfy
our original equation and extraneous solutions can happen when you're solving equations with
radicals in them. So let's first check x equals nine. If we plug in to our original equation,
we get nine plus a squared of nine and we want that to equal 12. Well, the square root
of nine is three, and nine plus three does indeed equal 12. So that solution checks out.
Now, let's try x equals 16. Plugging in, we get 16 plus a squared of 16. And that's supposed
to equal 12. Well, that says 16 plus four is supposed to equal 12. But that most definitely
is not true. And so x equals 16. Turns out to be extraneous solution, and our only solution
is x equals nine This next equation might not look like an
equation involving radicals. But in fact, we can think of a fractional exponent as being
a radical in disguise. Let's start by doing the same thing we did on the previous problem
by isolating This time, we'll isolate the part of the equation that involves the fractional exponent. So
I'll start with the original equation, two times P to the four fifths equals 1/8. And
I'll divide both sides by two or equivalently, I can multiply both sides by one half, that
gives me p to the four fifths equals 1/16. And I've effectively isolated the part of
the equation with the fractional exponent as much as possible. Now, in the previous
example, the next step was to get rid of the radical. In this example, we're going to get
rid of the fractional exponent. And I'm going to actually do this in two stages. First,
I'm going to raise both sides to the fifth power. That's because when I take an exponent to
an exponent, I'm multiply my exponents. And so that becomes just p to the fourth equals
1/16 to the fifth power. Now, I'm going to get rid of the fourth power by raising both
sides to the 1/4 power, or by taking the fourth root, there's something that you need to be
careful about though, when taking an even root, or the one over an even number
power, you always have to consider plus or minus your answer. It's kind of like when you write x squared
equals four, and you take the square root of both sides, x could equal plus or minus
the square root of four, right, x could equal plus or minus two, since minus two squared
is four, just as well as two squared. So that's why when you take an even root, or a one over
an even power of both sides, you always need to include the plus or minus sign, when it's
an odd root or one over an odd power, you don't need to do that. If you had something
like x cubed equals negative eight, then x equals the cube root of negative eight, which
is negative two would be your only solution, you don't need to do the plus or minus because
positive two wouldn't work. So that aside, explains why we need this plus
or minus power. And now p to the four to the 1/4. When I raise a power to a power, I multiply
by exponents, so that's just p to the one, which is equal to plus or minus 1/16 to the
fifth power to the 1/4 power. Now I just need to simplify this expression,
I don't really want to raise 1/16 to the fifth power, because 16 to the fifth power is like
a really huge number. So I think I'm actually going to rewrite this first as P equals plus or minus 1/16. I'll write
it back as the 5/4 power again. And as I continue to solve using my exponent
rules, I'm going to prefer to write this as 1/16
to the fourth root to the fifth power, because it's going to be easier to take the fourth
root, let's see the fourth root of 1/16 is the same thing as the fourth root of one over
the fourth root of 16. Raise all that to the fifth power. fourth root of one is just one
and the fourth root of 16 is to raise that to the fifth power, that's just going to be
one to the fifth over two to the fifth, which is plus or minus 130 seconds. The last step is to check answers. So I have the two answers p equals 130 seconds,
and P equals minus 130 seconds. And if I plug those both in 1/32 to the fourth fifth power. That gives me two times one to the fourth
power over 32 to the fourth power, which is two times one over 32/5 routed to the fourth
power. fifth root of 32 is two Raisa to the fourth power, I get 16. So this
is two times 1/16, which is 1/8, just as we wanted in the original equation up here. Similarly,
we can check that the P equals negative 1/32 actually does satisfy the equation, I'll leave
that step to the viewer. So our two solutions are p equals one over
32, and P equals minus one over 32. I do want to point out an alternate approach to getting
rid of the fractional exponent, we could have gotten rid of it all in one fell swoop by
raising both sides of our equation to the five fourths power. five fourths is the reciprocal of four fifths.
So when I use my exponent rules, and say that when I raise the power to the power, I multiply
my exponents, that gives me p to the four fifths times five fourths is plus or minus
1/16 to the five fourths, in other words, P to the One Power, which is just P is plus
or minus 1/16, to the five fourths, so that's an alternate and possibly faster way to get
the solution. Once again, the plus or minus comes from the fact that when we take the
5/4 power, we're really taking an even root a fourth root, and so we need to consider
both positive and negative answers. This video is about solving radical equations,
that is equations like this one that have square root signs in them, or cube roots or
any other kind of radical. In this video, we solved radical equations
by first isolating the radical sign, or the fractional exponent, and then removing the radical sine or the
fractional exponent by either squaring both sides or taking the
reciprocal power of both sides. This video is about solving equations with
absolute values in them. Recall that the absolute value of a positive
number is just the number, but the absolute value of a negative number is its opposite.
In general, I think of the absolute value of a number as representing its distance from
zero on the number line, the number four, and the number of negative four are both at
distance for from zero, and so the absolute value of both of them is four. Similarly, if I write the equation, the absolute
value of x is three, that means that x has to be three units away from zero on the number
line. And so X would have to be either negative
three, or three. Let's start with the equation three times the absolute value of x plus two
equals four. I'd like to isolate the absolute value part
of the equation, I can do this by starting with my original equation, subtracting two from both sides and dividing both sides by three. Now I'll think in terms of distance on a number
line, the absolute value of x is two thirds means that x is two thirds away from zero.
So x could be here for here at negative two thirds or two thirds. And the answer to my equation is x is negative
two thirds, or two thirds, I can check my answers by plugging in three times the added value of negative two
thirds plus two, I need to check it that equals four. Well, the absolute value of negative
two thirds is just two thirds. So this is three times two thirds plus two, which works
out to four. Similarly, if I plug in positive two thirds,
it also works out to give me the correct answer. The second example is a little different,
because the opposite value sign is around a more complicated expression, not just around
the X. I would start by isolating the absolute value
part. But it's already isolated. So I'll just go
ahead and jump to thinking about distance on the number line. So on my number line,
the whole expression 3x plus two is supposed to be at a distance of four from zero. So that means that 3x plus two is here at
four or 3x plus two though is it negative four, all right, those
as equations 3x plus two equals four, or 3x plus two is
minus four. And then I can solve. So this becomes 3x equals two, or x equals
two thirds. And over here, I get 3x equals minus six, or x equals minus two. Finally,
I'll check my answers. I'll leave it to you to verify that they both
work. A common mistake on absolute value equations
is to get rid of the absolute value signs like we did here, and then just solve for
one answer, instead of solving for both answers. Another mistake sometimes people make is,
once they get the first answer, they just assume that the negative of that works also. But that doesn't always work. In the first
example, our two answers were both the negatives of each other. But in our second examples,
or two answers, were not just the opposites of each other one was two thirds and the other
was negative two. In this third example, let's again, isolate
the absolute value part of the equation. So starting with our original equation, we can subtract 16 from both sides, and divide both sides by five or equivalently,
multiply by 1/5. Now let's think about distance on the number
line, we have an absolute value needs to equal negative
three. So that means whatever is inside the absolute value sign needs to be at distance
negative three from zero, well, you can't be at distance negative three from zero. Another
way of thinking about this is you can't have the absolute value of something and end up
with a negative number if the value is always positive, or zero. So this equation doesn't
actually make sense, and there are no solutions to this equation. In this video, we solved absolute value equations.
In many cases, an absolute value equation will have two solutions. But in some cases,
it'll have no solutions. And occasionally, it'll have just one solution. This video is about interval notation, and
easy and well known way to record inequalities. Before dealing with interval notation, it
is important to know how to deal with inequalities. Our first example of an inequality is written
here, all numbers between one and three, not including one and three. First, we used to write down our variable
x, that it is important to locate the key values for this problem that is one and three.
Now here we see that x is between these two numbers, meaning we will have one inequality
statement on each side of the variable. Here it says not including one and three, which
means that we do not have an or equal to sign beneath each inequality. Here we will put
one the lowest key value, and here we will put three the highest key value. Next, we're
going to graph this inequality on a number line. Here we write our key values one, and three.
Because it is not including one, and three, we have an empty circle around each number.
Because it isn't the numbers between we have a line connecting them. The last step of this problem is writing this
inequality in interval notation. writing things in interval notation is kind
of like writing an ordered pair. Here we will put one and then here we will put three. Next we need to put brackets around these
numbers. For this problem, it is not including one
in three, which means we will use soft brackets. However, if it were including one and three,
we will use hard brackets. It is important to note for interval notation,
that the smallest value always goes on the left and the biggest value always goes on
the right. You also include a comma between your two
key values. Now let's work on problem B. Once again we
write our variable x. Again it is between negative four and two but this time it is
including a negative four into this requires us to have the or equal to assign below the
inequality. Then we put our lowest key value here and their highest here. The number line
graph for this problem is slightly different. We still have our key values negative four and two.
But instead of an open circle, like we have right here, we instead use a closed circle,
representing that it is including negative four and two, you complete this with a line
in between. Last we write this in interval notation. In the last problem, I said that
for numbers, including the outside values, we would use these hard brackets. Now we are
actually using this. So we have or hard bracket on each side because isn't including foreign
zoo, then we put our smallest value on the left, and our highest value on the right,
with the comma in between. You now know how to correctly write these
two types of intervals. Now we are going to practice transforming
these from inequality notation to interval notation, and vice versa. This is slightly
more difficult than our previous examples of having two soft brackets or two hard brackets,
we'll have two different types. Now on the left side will have a hard bracket because
it is including the three. However, on the right side, it is a soft bracket because it
is it it is not including the one that we put a comma in the middle, a lower key value
and our higher key value. For the next problem, we're taking an equation already written an
interval notation and putting it back into inequality notation. For the second problem, we can see are key
values as being five and negative infinity. Now, this sounds a little bit weird, but let's
just set up or an equality, we have our variable x, which is less than because of the soft
bracket five, and greater than without the or equal to because it has a soft bracket
there to infinity. But because x is always greater than negative infinity, we can take
out this part, leaving us with x is less than five. It is important to note that a soft bracket
always accompanies infinity. This is because infinity is not a real number, so we cannot
include it just go as far up to it as we can. The next problem is a little tricky, because
we don't see another key value over here. But let's just start off the equation as a
soft bracket on this side due to the absence of an order equal to sign. And negative 15
is the lower key value. On the other side, we put the highest possible
number infinity, and then close it off with a soft bracket. We can see the relation of
this to the previous problem. And how it goes into this problem when x is greater than a
key value instead of less than a key value. Once again, we have our sauce bracket for
infinity, which is always true. Part D brings up an important point about
which number goes on the left. For all of our other problems, we have had the inequalities
pointing left instead of rights. When seeing Part D, you
might think oh, four is on the left, so it would go here, and zero is on the right who
would go here. But that is not true. When writing inequalities, you must always
have the lower value on the left, which for this problem is zero. To fix this, we can
simply flip this inequality. So it reads like this, it is still identical just written in
an easier form to transform it into interval notation, then we can see that zero has a
soft bracket, because it is not including zero, but r comma four or other key value
and a hard backup because it is or equal to four. For interval notation, you must always have
the smaller number on the left side. This was our video on interval notation, an
alternative way to write inequalities. This video is about solving inequalities that
have absolute value signs in them. Let's look at the inequality absolute value
of x is less than five on the number line. Thinking of absolute value as distance. This
means that the distance between x and zero is less than five units. So x has to live
somewhere in between negative five and five We can express this as an inequality without
absolute value signs by saying negative five is less than x, which is less than five. Or
we can use interval notation, soft bracket negative five, five, soft bracket. Both of these formulations are equivalent
to the original one, but don't involve the absolute value signs. In the second example, we're looking for the
values of x for which the absolute value of x is greater than or equal to five. on the number line, this means that the distance
of x from the zero, it's got to be bigger than or equal to five units. A distance bigger than five units means that
x has to live somewhere over here, or somewhere over here, where it's farther than five units
away from zero. Course x could also have a distance equal to five units. So I'll fill
in that dot and shade in the other parts of the number line that satisfy my inequality. Now I can rewrite the inequality without the
absolute value symbols by saying that x is less than or equal to negative five, or x
is greater than or equal to five. I could also write this in interval notation, soft bracket, negative infinity, negative
five, hard bracket. And the second part is hard bracket five infinity soft bracket, I
combine these with a u for union. Because I'm trying to describe all these points on
the number line together with all these other points. Let's take this analysis a step further with
a slightly more complicated problem. Now I want the absolute value of three minus two
t to be less than four. And an absolute value less than four means
a distance less than four on the number line. But it's not the variable t that lives in
here at a distance of less than four from zero, it's the whole expression, three minus
two t. So three minus two t, live somewhere in here.
And I can rewrite this as an inequality without absolute value signs by saying negative four
is less than three minus two t is less than four. Now I have a compound inequality that
I can solve the usual way. First, I subtract three from all three sides to get negative
seven is less than negative two t is less than one. And now I'll divide all three sides
by negative two. Since negative two is a negative number, this reverses the directions of the
inequalities. Simplifying, I get seven halves is greater
than t is greater than negative one half. So my final answer on the number line looks
like all the stuff between negative a half and seven halves. But not including the endpoints, and an interval
notation, I can write this soft bracket negative a half, seven, half soft bracket, please pause the video and try the next problem
on your own. thinking in terms of distance, this inequality
says that the distance between the expression three minus two t and zero is always bigger
than four. Let me draw this on the number line. If three minus two t has a distance bigger
than four from zero, then it can't be in this region that's near zero, it has to be on the
outside in one of these two regions. That is three minus two t is either less than
negative four, or three minus two t is bigger than four. I solve these two inequalities
separately, the first one, subtracting three from both sides, I get negative two t is less
than negative seven divided by negative two, I get T is bigger than seven halves. And then
on the other side, I get negative two t is greater than one. So t is less than negative
one half, I had to flip inequalities in the last step due to dividing by a negative number.
So let's check this out on the number line again, the first piece says that t is greater
than seven halves. I'll draw that over here. And the second piece says that t is less than
negative one half. I'll draw that down here. Because these two statements are joined with
an or I'm looking for the t values that are in this one, or in this one. That is I want
both of these regions put together. So an interval notation, this reads negative infinity
to negative one half soft bracket union soft bracket Seven halves to infinity. This last example looks more complicated.
But if I simplify first and isolate the absolute value part, it looks pretty much like the
previous ones. So I'll start by subtracting seven from both sides. And then I'll divide
both sides by two. Now I'll draw my number line. And I'm looking for this expression for x
plus five, to always have distance greater than or equal to negative three from zero,
wait a second, distance greater than equal to negative three, well, distance is always
greater than or equal to negative three is always greater than equal to zero. So this,
in fact, is always true. And so the answer to my inequality is all
numbers between negative infinity and infinity. In other words, all real numbers. Once solving absolute value inequalities,
it's good to think about distance. And absolute value of something that's less than a number
means that whatever's inside the absolute value signs is close to zero. On the other hand, an absolute value is something
and being greater than a number means that whatever's inside the absolute value sign
is far away from zero, because its distance from zero is bigger than that certain number. drawing these pictures on the number line
is a helpful way to rewrite the absolute value and equality as an inequality that doesn't
contain an absolute value sign. In this case, it would be negative three is less than x
plus two is less than three. And in the other case, it would be either x plus two is less
than negative three, or x plus two is greater than three. This video is about solving linear inequalities.
Those are inequalities like this one that involve a variable here x, but don't involve
any x squared or other higher power terms. The good news is, we can solve linear inequalities,
just like we solve linear equations by distributing, adding and subtracting terms to both sides
and multiplying and dividing by numbers on both sides. The only thing that's different
is that if you multiply or divide by a negative number, then you need to reverse the direction
of the inequality. For example, if we had the inequality, negative x is less than negative
five, and we wanted to multiply both sides by negative one to get rid of the negative
signs, we'd have to also switch or reverse the inequality. With this caution in mind,
let's look at our first example. Since our variable x is trapped in parentheses,
I'll distribute the negative five to free it from the parentheses. That gives me negative 5x minus 10 plus three
is greater than eight. Negative 10 plus three is negative seven,
so I'll rewrite this as negative 5x minus seven is greater than eight. Now I'll add
seven to both sides to get negative 5x is greater than 15. Now I'd like to divide both
sides by negative five. Since negative five is a negative number that reverses the inequality.
So I get x is less than 15 divided by negative five. In other words, x is less than negative
three. If I wanted to graph this on a number line,
I just need to put down a negative three, an open circle around it, and shade in to
the left, I use an open circle, because x is strictly
less than negative three and can't equal negative three. If I wanted to write this in interval
notation, I've added a soft bracket negative infinity, negative three soft bracket. Again,
the soft bracket is because the negative three is not included. This next example is an example
of a compound inequality. It has two parts. Either this statement is true, or this statement
is true. I want to find the values of x that satisfy either one. I'll solve this by working
out each part separately, and then combining them at the end. For the inequality on the
left, I'll copy it over here. I'm going to add four to both sides. then subtract x from both sides and then divide both sides by two. I didn't have to reverse the inequality sign
because I divided by a positive number on the right side, I'll copy the equation
over, subtract one from both sides, and divide both sides by 696 is the same as three halves.
Now I'm looking for the x values that make this statement. row four, make this statement true. Let me
graph this on a number line. x is less than or equal to negative two, means
I put a filled in circle there and graph everything to the left. X is greater than three halves
means I put a empty circle here and shaded and everything to the right. My final answer includes both of these pieces,
which I'll reshade in green, because x is allowed to be an either one or the other.
Finally, I can write this in interval notation. The first piece on the number line can be
described as soft bracket negative infinity, negative two hard bracket. And the second
piece can be described as soft bracket three halves, infinity soft bracket to indicate
that x can be in either one of these pieces, I use the union side, which is a U. That means that my answer includes all x values
in here together with all x values in here. This next example is also a compound inequality.
This time I'm joined by an ad, the and means I'm looking for all y values that satisfy
both this and this at the same time. Again, I can solve each piece separately on the left, to isolate the Y, I need to multiply
by negative three halves on both sides. So that gives me Why is less than negative 12
times negative three halves, the greater than flip to a less than because I was multiplying
by negative three halves, which is a negative number. By clean up the right side, I get why is less
than 18. On the right side, I'll start by subtracting
two from both sides. And now I'll divide by negative four, again,
a negative number, so that flips the inequality. So that's why is less than three over negative
four. In other words, y is less than negative three fourths. Again, I'm looking for the
y values that make both of these statements true at the same time. Let me graph this on the number line, the Y is less than 18. I can graph that by
drawing the number 18. I don't want to include it. So I use an empty
circle and I shaded everything to the left the statement y is less than negative three
fourths, I need to draw a negative three fourths. And again, I don't include it, but I do include
everything on the left. Since I want the y values for which both of these statements
are true, I need the y values that are in both colored blue and colored red. And so
that would be this part right here. I'll just draw it above so you can see it easily. So
that would be all the numbers from negative three fourths and lower, not including negative
three, four, since those are the parts of the number line that have both red and blue
colors on them. In interval notation, my final answer will be soft bracket negative infinity
to negative three fourths soft bracket. As my final example, I have an inequality
that has two inequality signs in it negative three is less than or equal to 6x minus two
is less than 10. I can think of this as being a compound inequality with two parts, negative
3x is less than or equal to 6x minus two. And at the same time 6x minus two is less
than 10. I could solve this into pieces as before. But instead, it's a little more efficient
to just solve it all at once, by doing the same thing to all three sides. So as a first
step, I'll add two to all three sides. That gives me negative one is less than or equal
to 6x is less than 12. And now I'm going to divide all three sides by six to isolate the
x. So that gives me negative one, six is less than or equal to x is less than two. If we solved it, instead, in two pieces above,
we'd end up with the same thing because we get negative one six is less than or equal
to x from this piece, and we'd get x is less than two on this piece. And because of the
and statement, that's the same thing as saying negative one, six is less than or equal to
x, which is less than two. Either way we do it. Let's see if what it
looks like on the number line. So on the number line, we're looking for things that are between
two and negative one six, including the negative one, six But not including the to interval notation,
we can write this as hard bracket, negative 162 soft bracket. In this video, we solve linear inequalities,
including some compound inequalities, joined by the conjunctions and, and or, remember when we're working with and we're
looking for places on the number line where both statements are true. That is, we're looking for the overlap on
the number line. In this case, the points on the number line
that are colored both red and blue at the same time. When we're working with oral statements, we're
looking for places where either one or the other statement is true or both on the number line, this corresponds to points that are colored
either red or blue, or both. And in this picture, that will actually correspond to the entire
number line. In this video, we'll solve inequalities involving
polynomials like this one, and inequalities involving rational expressions like this one. Let's start with a simple example. Maybe a
deceptively simple example. If you see the inequality, x squared is less than four, you
might be very tempted to take the square root of both sides and get something like x is
less than two as your answer. But in fact, that doesn't work. To see why it's not correct, consider the
x value of negative 10. Negative 10 satisfies the inequality, x is
less than two since negative 10 is less than two. But it doesn't satisfy the inequality
x squared is less than four, since negative 10 squared is 100, which is not less than
four. So these two inequalities are not the same. And it doesn't work to solve a quadratic
inequality just to take the square root of both sides, you might be thinking part of
why this reasoning is wrong, as we've ignored the negative two option, right? If we had
the equation, x squared equals four, then x equals two would just be one option, x equals
negative two would be another solution. So somehow, our solution to this inequality should
take this into account. In fact, a good way to solve an inequality involving x squares
or higher power terms, is to solve the associated equation first. But before we even do that,
I like to pull everything over to one side, so that my inequality has zero on the other
side. So for our equation, I'll subtract four from
both sides to get x squared minus four is less than zero. Now, I'm going to actually solve the associated
equation, x squared minus four is equal to zero, I can do this by factoring to x minus
two times x plus two is equal to zero. And I'll set my factors equal to zero, and I get
x equals two and x equals minus two. Now, I'm going to plot the solutions to my
equation on the number line. So I write down negative two and two, those are the places
where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero. Since I want to find where x squared minus
four is less than zero, I want to know where this expression x squared minus four is positive
or negative, a good way to find that out is to plug in test values. So first, a plug in
a test value in this area of the number line, something less than negative to say x equals
negative three. If I plug in negative three into x squared
minus four, I get negative three squared minus four, which is nine minus four, which is five,
that's a positive number. So at negative three, the expression x squared minus four is positive.
And in fact, everywhere on this region of the number line, my expression is going to
be positive, because it can jump from positive to negative without going through a place
where it's zero, I can figure out whether x squared minus four is positive or negative
on this region, and on this region of the number line by plugging in test value similar
way, evaluate the plug in between negative two
and two, a nice value is x equals 00 squared minus four, that's negative four and negative
number. So I know that my expression x squared minus four is negative on this whole interval.
Finally, I can plug in something like x equals 10, something bigger than two, and I get 10
squared minus four. Without even computing that I can tell that that's going to be a
positive number. And that's all that's important. Again, since I want x squared minus four to
be less than zero, I'm looking for the places on this number line where I'm getting negatives. So I will share that in on my number
line. It's in here, not including the endpoints. Because the endpoints are where my expression
x squared minus four is equal to zero, and I want it strictly less than zero, I can write my answer as an inequality, negative
two is less than x is less than two, or an interval notation as soft bracket negative
two to soft bracket. Our next example, we can solve similarly,
first, we'll move everything to one side, so that our inequality is x cubed minus 5x
squared minus 6x is greater than or equal to zero. Next, we'll solve the associated
equation by factoring. So first, I'll write down the equation. Now I'll factor out an
x. And now I'll factor the quadratic. So the solutions to my equation are x equals 0x equals
six and x equals negative one, I'll write the solutions to the equation on
the number line. So that's negative one, zero, and six. That's
where my expression x times x minus six times x plus one is equal to zero. But I want to find where it's greater than
or equal to zero. So again, I can use test values, I can plug in, for example, x equals
negative two, either to this version of expression, or to this factored version. Since I only
care whether my answer is positive or negative, it's sometimes easier to use the factored
version. For example, when x is negative two, this factor is negative. But this factor, x minus six is also negative
when I plug in negative two for x. Finally, x plus one, when I plug in negative
two for x, that's negative one, that's also negative. And a negative times a negative
times a negative gives me a negative number. If I plug in something, between negative one
and zero, say x equals negative one half, then I'm going to get a negative for this
factor, a negative for this factor, but a positive for this third factor. Negative times negative times positive gives
me a positive for a test value between zero and six, let's
try x equals one. Now I'll get a positive for this factor a
negative for this factor, and a positive for this factor. positive times a negative times a positive
gives me a negative. Finally, for a test value bigger than six, we could use say x equals
100. That's going to give me positive, positive positive. So my product will be positive. Since I want values where my expression is
greater than or equal to zero, I want the places where it equals zero. And the places where it's positive. So my final answer will be close bracket negative
one to zero, close bracket union, close bracket six to infinity. As our final example, let's consider the rational
inequality, x squared plus 6x plus nine divided by x minus one is less than or equal to zero. Although it might be tempting to clear the
denominator and multiply both sides by x minus one, it's dangerous to do that, because x
minus one could be a positive number. But it could also be a negative number. And when
you multiply both sides by a negative number, you have to reverse the inequality. Although
it's possible to solve the inequality this way, by thinking of cases where x minus one
is less than zero or bigger than zero, I think it's much easier just to solve the same way
as we did before. So we'll start by rewriting so that we move all terms to the left and
have zero on the right. Well, that's already true. So the next step would be to solve the
associated equation. That is x squared plus 6x plus nine over x
minus one is equal to zero. That would be where the numerator is 0x squared
plus 6x plus nine is equal to zero. So we're x plus three squared is zero, or x equals
negative three. There's one extra step we have to do for rational expressions. And that's
we need to find where the expression does not exist. That is, let's find where the denominator
is zero. And that said, x equals one. I'll put all those numbers on the number line.
The places where am I rational expression is equal to zero, and
the place where my rational expression doesn't exist, then I can start in with test values.
For example, x equals minus four, zero and to work. If I plug those values into this
expression here, I get a negative answer a negative answer and a positive answer. The
reason I need to conclude the values on my number line where my denominators zero is
because I can my expression can switch from negative to positive by passing through a
place where my rational expression doesn't exist, as well as passing by passing flew
through a place where my rational expression is equal to zero. Now I'm looking for where my original expression
was less than or equal to zero. So that means I want the places on the number line where
my expression is equal to zero, and also the places where it's negative. So my final answer is x is less than one,
or an interval notation, negative infinity to one. In this video, we solved polynomial and rational
inequalities by making a number line and you think test values to make a sine chart. The distance formula can be used to find the
distance between two points, if we know their coordinates, if this first point has coordinates, x one,
y one, and the second point has coordinates x two, y two, then the distance between them
is given by the formula, the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus
y one squared. This formula actually comes from the Pythagorean
Theorem, let me draw a right triangle with these two points as two of its vertices, then the length of this side is the difference
between the 2x coordinates. Similarly, the length of this vertical side is the difference
between the two y coordinates. Now that Pythagoras theorem says that for
any right triangle, with sides labeled A and B, and hypotony is labeled C, we have that
a squared plus b squared equals c squared. Well, if we apply that to this triangle here, this hypotony News is the distance between
the two points that we're looking for. So but Tyrion theorem says, the square of
this side length, that is x two minus x one squared, plus the square of this side length,
which is y two minus y one squared has to equal the square of the hypothesis, that is
d squared. taking the square root of both sides of this
equation, we get the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus y one
squared is equal to d, we don't have to worry about using plus or
minus signs when we take the square root because distance is always positive. So we've derived our distance formula. Now
let's use it as an example. Let's find the distance between the two points,
negative one five, for negative one, five, maybe over here, and for two, this notation just means that P is the point
with coordinates negative one five, and q is the point with coordinates for two. We have the distance formula, let's think of P being the point with coordinates
x one y one, and Q being the point with coordinates x two y two. But as we'll see, it really doesn't matter
which one is which, plugging into our formula, we get d is the square root of n x two minus
x one. So that's four minus negative one squared, and then we add y two minus y one, so that's two minus five
squared. Working out the arithmetic a little bit for
minus negative one, that's four plus one or five squared, plus negative three squared.
So that's the square root of 25 plus nine are the square root of 34. Let's see what
would have happened if we'd call this first point, x two y two instead, and a second. Why'd x one y one, then we would have gotten
the same distance formula, but we would have taken negative one minus four and added the difference of y's squared. So
that's why two five minus two squared. That gives us the square root of negative
five squared plus three squared, which works out to the same thing. In this video, we use the distance formula
to find the distance between two points. When writing down the distance formula, sometimes
students forget whether this is a plus or a minus and whether these are pluses or minuses.
One way to remember is to think that the distance formula comes from the Pythagorean Theorem.
That's why there's a plus in here. And then a minus in here, because we're finding
the difference between the coordinates to find the lengths of the sides. The midpoint formula helps us find the coordinates
of the midpoint of a line segment, as long as we know the coordinates of the endpoints. So let's call the coordinates of this endpoint
x one, y one, and the coordinates of this other endpoint x two, y two, the x coordinate of the midpoint is going
to be exactly halfway in between the x coordinates of the endpoints. To get a number halfway
in between two other numbers, we just take the average. Similarly, the y coordinate of this midpoint
is going to be exactly halfway in between the y coordinates of the endpoints. So the
y coordinate of the midpoint is going to be the average of those y coordinates. So we see that the coordinates of the midpoint
are x one plus x two over two, y one plus y two over two. Let's use this midpoint formula in an example, we want to find the midpoint of the segment
between the points, negative one, five, and four to me draw the line segment between them. So
visually, the midpoint is going to be somewhere around here. But to find its exact coordinates,
we're going to use x one plus x two over two, and y one plus y two over two, where this
first point is coordinates, x one, y one, and the second point has coordinates x two
y two, it doesn't actually matter which point you decide is x one y one, which one is x
two, y two, the formula will still give you the same answer for the midpoint. So let's see, I take my average of my x coordinates.
So that's negative one, plus four over two, and the average of my Y coordinates, so that's
five plus two over two, and I get three halves, seven halves, as the coordinates of my midpoint. In this video, we use the midpoint formula
to find the midpoint of a line segment, just by taking the average of the x coordinates
and the average of the y coordinates. This video is about graphs and equations of circles.
Suppose we want to find the equation of a circle of radius five, centered at the point
three, two will look something like this. For any point, x, y on the circle, we know
that the distance of that point xy from the center
is equal to the radius that is five from the distance formula, that distance of five is
equal to the square root of the difference of the x coordinates. That's x minus three squared plus the difference of the y coordinates,
that's y minus two squared. And if I square both sides of that equation,
I get five squared is this square root squared. In other words, 25 is equal to x minus three
squared plus y minus two squared. Since the square root and the squared undo each other. A lot of times people will write the X minus
three squared plus y minus two squared on the left side of the equation and the 25 on
the right side of the equation. This is the standard form for the equation of the circle. The same reasoning can be generalized Find the general equation for a circle with
radius R centered at a point HK. For any point with coordinates, x, y on the
circle, the distance between the point with coordinates x, y and the point with coordinates
HK is equal to the radius r. So we have that the distance is equal to r, but by the distance
formula, that's the square root of the difference between the x coordinates x minus h squared
plus the difference in the y coordinates y minus k squared. squaring both sides as before,
we get r squared is the square root squared, canceling the square root and the squared,
and rearranging the equation, that gives us x minus h squared plus y minus k squared equals
r squared. That's the general formula for a circle with radius r, and center HK. Notice that the coordinates h and k are subtracted
here, the two squares are added because they are in the distance formula, and the radius
is squared on the other side, if you remember this general formula, that makes it easy to
write down the equation for a circle, for example, if we want the equation for a circle, of radius six, and center at zero, negative
three, then we have our equal six, and h k is our
zero negative three. So plugging into the formula, we get x minus zero squared, plus y minus
negative three squared equals six squared, or simplified this is x squared plus y plus
three squared equals 36. Suppose we're given an equation like this
one, and we want to decide if it's the equation of a circle, and if so what's the center was
the radius. Well, this equation matches the form for a
circle, x minus h squared plus y minus k squared equals r squared. If we let h, b five, Why
be negative sex since that way, subtracting a negative six is like adding a six, five must be our r squared. So that means
that R is the square root of five. So this is our radius. And our center is the point
five, negative six. And this is indeed the equation for a circle, which we could then graph by putting down
the center and estimating the radius, which is a little bit more than two. This equation might not look like the equation
of a circle, but it actually can be transformed. To look like the equation of a circle, we're
trying to make it look like something of the form x minus h squared plus y minus k squared
equals r squared. First, I'd like to get rid of the coefficients
in front of the x squared and the y squared, so I'm going to divide everything by nine.
This gives me x squared plus y squared plus 8x minus two y plus four equals zero. Next,
I'm going to group the x terms together the x squared and the 8x. So write x squared plus
8x. I'll group the y terms together the Y squared minus two y. And I'll subtract the four over to the other
side. This still doesn't look much like the equation
of a circle. But as the next step, I'm going to do something called completing the square,
I'm going to take this coefficient of x eight divided by two and then square it. In other
words, eight over two squared, that's four squared, which is 16. I'm going to add 16
to both sides of my equation. So the 16 here, and on the other side, now I'm going to do the same thing to the
coefficient of y, negative two divided by two is negative one, square that and I get
one. So now I'm going to add a one to both sides, but I'll put it near the y terms. So
add a one there. And then to keep things balanced, I have to add it to the other side. On the
right side, I have the number 13. On the left side, I can wrap up this expression x squared
plus 8x plus 16 into x plus four squared. To convince you, that's correct. If we multiply
out x plus four times x plus four, we get x squared plus 4x plus 4x plus 16, or x squared
plus 8x plus 16, the same thing we have right here. Similarly, we can wrap up y squared
minus two y plus one as y minus one squared. Again, I'll work out
the distribution down here, that's y squared minus y minus y plus one, or y squared minus
two y plus one, just like we have up here. If you're wondering how I knew to use four
and minus one, the four came from taking half of eight, and the minus one came from taking
half the negative two. Now we have an equation for a circle and standard form. And we can
read off the center, which is negative four, negative one, and the radius, which is the
square root of 13. It might seem like magic that this trick of
taking half of this coefficient and squaring it and adding it to both sides lets us wrap
up this expression into this expression a perfect square. But to see why that works,
let's take a look at what happens if we expand out x minus h squared, the thing that we're
trying to get to. So if we expand that out, x minus h squared, which is x minus h times
x minus h is, which multiplies out to x squared minus HX minus h x plus h squared, or x squared
minus two h x plus h squared. Now if we start out with this part, with some x squared term
and some coefficient of x, we're trying to decide what to add on in order to wrap it
up into x minus h squared. The thing to add on is h squared here, which comes from half
of this coefficient squared, right, because half of negative two H is a negative H, square
that you get the H squared. And then when we do wrap it up, it's half of this coefficient
of x, that appears right here. This trick of completing the square is really
handy for turning an equation for a circle in disguise, into the standard equation for
the circle. In this video, we found the standard equation for a circle x minus h squared plus
y minus k squared equals r squared, where r is the radius, and h k is the center. We also showed a method of completing the
square. When you have an equation for a circle in
disguise, completing the square will help you rewrite it into the standard form. This video is about graphs and equations of
lines. Here we're given the graph of a line, we want
to find the equation, one standard format for the equation of a line is y equals mx
plus b. here am represents the slope, and B represents the y intercept, the y value
where the line crosses the y axis, the slope is equal to the rise over the run. Or sometimes
this is written as the change in y values over the change in x values. Or in other words,
y two minus y one over x two minus x one, where x one y one and x two y two are points
on the line. While we could use any two points on the line,
to find the slope, it's convenient to use points where the x and y coordinates are integers,
that is points where the line passes through grid points. So here would be one convenient
point to use. And here's another convenient point to use. The coordinates of the first point are one,
two, and the next point, this is let's say, five, negative one. Now I can find the slope
by looking at the rise over the run. So as I go through a run of this distance, I go
through a rise of that distance especially gonna be a negative rise or a fall because
my line is pointing down. So let's see counting off squares. This is a run of 1234 squares
and a rise of 123. So negative three, so my slope is going to be negative three over four. I got that answer by counting squares, but
I could have also gotten it by Looking at the difference in my y values over
the difference in my x values, that is, I could have done negative one minus two, that's from my difference
in Y values, and divide that by my difference in x values, which is five minus one, that gives me negative
three over four, as before. So my M is negative three fourths. Now I need to figure out the value of b, my
y intercept, well, I could just read it off the graph, it looks like approximately 2.75.
But if I want to be more accurate, I can again use a point that has integer coordinates that
I know it's exact coordinates. So either this point or that point, let's try this point.
And I can start off with my equation y equals mx plus b, that is y equals negative three
fourths x plus b. And I can plug in the point one, two, for my x and y. So that gives me
two equals negative three fourths times one plus b, solving for B. Let's see that's two
equals negative three fourths plus b. So add three fourths to both sides, that's two plus
three fourths equals b. So b is eight fourths plus three fourths, which is 11. Four switches
actually, just what I eyeballed it today. So now I can write out my final equation for
my line y equals negative three fourths x plus 11 fourths by plugging in for m and b.
Next, let's find the equation for this horizontal line. a horizontal line has slope zero. So if we
think of it as y equals mx plus b, m is going to be zero. In other words, it's just y equals
b, y is some constant. So if we can figure out what that that constant y value is, it
looks like it's two, let's see this three, three and a half,
we can just write down the equation directly, y equals 3.5. For a vertical line, like this one, it doesn't
really have a slope. I mean, if you tried to do the rise over the run, there's no run. So you'd I guess you'd be
dividing by zero and get an infinite slope. But But instead, we just think of it as an
equation of the form x equals something. And in this case, x equals negative two, notice
that all of the points on our line have the same x coordinate of negative two and the
y coordinate can be anything. So this is how we write the equation for a
vertical line. In this example, we're not shown a graph of
the line, we're just get told that it goes through two points. But knowing that I go
through two points is enough to find the equation for the line. First, we can find the slope
by taking the difference in Y values over the difference in x values. So that's negative
three minus two over four minus one, which is negative five thirds. So we can use the standard equation for the line, this is called
the slope intercept form. And we can plug in negative five thirds. And
we can use one point, either one will do will still get the same final answer. So let's
use one two and plug that in to get two equals negative five thirds times one plus b. And
so B is two plus five thirds, which is six thirds plus five thirds, which is 11 thirds.
So our equation is y equals negative five thirds x plus 11 thirds. This is method one. method two uses a slightly different form
of the equation, it's called the point slope form and it goes y minus y naught is equal
to m times x minus x naught, where x naught y naught is a point on the line and again
is the slope. So we calculate the slope the same way by taking a difference in Y values
over a difference in x values. But then, we can simply plug in any point. For example, the point one two will work we
can plug one in for x naught and two in for Y not in this point slope form. That gives
us y minus Two is equal to minus five thirds x minus
one. Notice that these two equations, while they
may look different, are actually equivalent, because if I distribute the negative five
thirds, and then add the two to both sides, I get the same equation as above. So we've seen two ways of finding the equation
for the line using the slope intercept form. And using the point slope form. In this video, we saw that you can find the
equation for a line, if you know the slope. And you know one point, you can also find the equation for the line
if you know two points, because you can use the two points to get the slope and then plug
in one of those points. To figure out the rest of the equation. We saw two standard forms for the equation
of a line the slope intercept form y equals mx plus
b, where m is the slope, and B is the y intercept. And the point slope form y minus y naught
equals m times x minus x naught, where m again is the slope and x naught y naught is a point
on the line. This video is about finding parallel and perpendicular
lines. Suppose we have a line of slope three fourths, in other words, the rise over the run is three over four, than any other line that's parallel to this
line will have the same slope, the same fries over run. So that's our first fact to keep in mind,
parallel lines have the same slopes. Suppose on the other hand, we want to find a line
perpendicular to our original line with its original slope of three fourths. A perpendicular line, in other words, align
at a 90 degree angle to our original line will have a slope, that's the negative reciprocal
of the opposite reciprocal of our original slope. So we take the reciprocal of three
for us, that's four thirds, and we make it its opposite by changing it from positive
to negative. So I'll write this as a principle that perpendicular
lines have opposite reciprocal slopes, to get the hang of what it means to be an opposite
reciprocal, let's look at a few examples. So here's the original slope, and this will
be the opposite reciprocal, which would represent the slope of our perpendicular line. So for
example, if one was to the opposite reciprocal, reciprocal of two is one half opposite means
I change the sign, if the first slope turned out to be, say, negative 1/3, the reciprocal
of 1/3 is three over one or just three. And the opposite means I change it from a negative
to a positive, so my perpendicular slope would be would be three. One more example, if I started off with a
slope of, say, seven halves, then the reciprocal of that would be two sevenths. And I change
it to an opposite reciprocal, by changing the positive to a negative. Let's use these two principles in some examples. In our first example, we need to find the
equation of a line that's parallel to this slump, and go through the point negative three
two. Well, in order to get started, I need to figure out the slope of this line. So let
me put this line into a more standard form the the slope intercept form. So I'll start
with three y minus 4x plus six equals zero, I'm going to solve for y to put it in this
this more standard form. So I'll say three y equals 4x minus six and then divide by three
to get y equals four thirds x minus six thirds is divided all my turns by three, I can simplify
that a little bit y equals four thirds x minus two. Now I can read off the slope of my original
line, and one is four thirds. That means my slope of my new line, my parallel line will
also be four thirds. So my new line will have the equation y equals four thirds ax plus
b for some B, of course, B will probably not be negative two like it was for the first line, it'll be something else determined
by the fact that it goes through this point negative three to, to figure out what b is,
I plug in the point negative three to four, negative three for x, and two for y. So that
gives me two equals four thirds times negative three plus b, and I'll solve for b. So let's
see. First, let me just simplify. So two equals, this is negative 12 thirds plus b, or in other
words, two is negative four plus b. So that means that B is going to be six, and by my
parallel line will have the equation y equals four thirds x plus six. Next, let's find the equation of a line that's
perpendicular to a given line through and go through a given point. Again, in order
to get started, I need to find what the slope of this given line is. So I'll rewrite it,
well, first, I'll just copy it over 6x plus three, y equals four. And then I can put it
in the standard slope intercept form by solving for y. So three, y is negative 6x plus four,
divide everything by three, I get y equals negative six thirds x plus four thirds. So
y is negative 2x, plus four thirds. So my original slope of my original line is negative
two, which means my perpendicular slope is the opposite reciprocal, so I take the reciprocal
of of negative two, that's negative one half and I change the sign so that gives me one
half as the slope of my perpendicular line. Now, my new line, I know is going to be y
equals one half x plus b for some B, and I can plug in my point on my new line, so one
for y and four for x, and solve for b, so I get one equals two plus b, So b is negative
one. And so my new line has equation one half x minus one. These next two examples are a little bit different,
because now we're looking at a line parallel to a completely horizontal line, let me draw
this line y equals three, so the y coordinate is always three, which means that my line
will be a horizontal line through that height at height y equals three, if I want something
parallel to this line, it will also be a horizontal line. Since it goes through the point negative
two, one, C, negative two, one has to go through that point there, it's gonna have always have a y coordinate
of one the same as the y coordinate of the point it goes through, so my answer will just
be y equals one. In the next example, we want a line that's
perpendicular to the line y equals four another horizontal line y equals four, but perpendicular
means I'm going to need a vertical line. So I need a vertical line that goes through the
point three, four. Okay, and so I'm going to draw a vertical
line there. Now vertical lines have the form x equals something for the equation. And to
find what x equals, I just need to look at the x coordinate of the point I'm going through
this point three four, so that x coordinate is three and all the points on this, this
perpendicular and vertical line have X coordinate three so my answer is x equals three. In this video will use the fact that parallel
lines have the same slope and perpendicular lines have opposite reciprocal slopes, to
find the equations of parallel and perpendicular lines. This video introduces functions and their
domains and ranges. A function is a correspondence between input
numbers usually the x values and output numbers, usually the y values, that sends each input
number to exactly one output number. Sometimes a function is thought of as a rule or machine in which you can feed in x values as input
and get out y values as output. So, non mathematical example of a function might be the biological
mother function, which takes as input any person and it gives us output their biological
mother. This function satisfies the condition that
each input number object person in this case, get sent to exactly one output per Because if you take any person, they just
have one biological mother. So that rule does give you a function. But if I change things
around and just use the the mother function, which sends to each person, their mother,
that's no longer going to be a function because there are some people who have more than one
mother, right, they could have a biological mother and adopted mother, or a mother and
a stepmother, or any number of situations. So since there's, there's at least some people
who you would put it as input, and then you'd get like more than one possible output that
violates this, this rule of functions, that would not be a function. Now, most of the
time, we'll work with functions that are described with equations, not in terms of mothers. So
for example, we can have the function y equals x squared plus one. This can also be written as f of x equals
x squared plus one. Here, f of x is function notation that stands for the output value
of y. Notice that this notation is not representing
multiplication, we're not multiplying f by x, instead, we're going to be putting in a
value for x as input and getting out a value of f of x or y. For example, if we want to
evaluate f of two, we're plugging in two as input for x either in this equation, or in
that equation. Since F of two means two squared plus one, f of two is going to equal five.
Similarly, f of five means I plug in five for x, so that's gonna be five squared plus
one, or 26. Sometimes it's useful to evaluate a function on a more complicated expression
involving other variables. In this case, remember, the functions value on any expression, it's
just what you what you get when you plug in that whole expression for x. So f of a plus three is going to be the quantity
a plus three squared plus one, we could rewrite that as a squared plus six
a plus nine plus one, or a squared plus six a plus 10. When evaluating a function on a complex expression,
it's important to keep the parentheses when you plug in for x. That way, you evaluate
the function on the whole expression. For example, it would be wrong to write f of a plus three equals a plus three
squared plus one without the parentheses, because that would imply that we were just
squaring the three and not the whole expression, a plus three. Sometimes a function is described with a graph
instead of an equation. In this example, this graph is supposed to represent the function
g of x. Not all graphs actually represent functions. For example, the graph of a circle
doesn't represent a function. That's because the graph of a circle violates the vertical
line test, you can draw a vertical line and intersect the graph in more than one point. But our graph, it left satisfies the vertical
line test, any vertical line intersects the graph, and at most one point, that means is
a function, because every x value will have at most one y value that corresponds to it.
Let's evaluate g have to note that two is an x value. And we'll use the graph to find
the corresponding y value. So I look for two on the x axis, and find the point on the graph
that has that x value that's right here. Now I can look at the y value of that point looks
like three, and therefore gf two is equal to three. If I try to do the same thing to
evaluate g of five, I run into trouble. Five is an x value, I look for it on the x axis,
but there's no point on the graph that has that x value. Therefore, g of five is undefined, or we can
say it does not exist. The question of what x values and y values make sense for a function
leads us to a discussion of domain and range. The domain of a function is all possible x
values that makes sense for that function. The range is the y values that make sense
for the function. In this example, we saw that the x value of
five didn't have a corresponding y value for this function. So the x value of five is not
in the domain of our function J. To find the x values in the domain, we have to look at
the x values that correspond to points on the graph. One way to do that is to take the
shadow or projection of the graph onto the x axis and see what x values are
hit. It looks like we're hitting all x values starting at negative eight, and continuing
up to four. So our domain is the x's between negative eight, and four,
including those endpoints. Or we can write this in interval notation as negative eight
comma four with square brackets. To find the range of the function, we look
for the y values corresponding to points on this graph, we can do that. By taking the shadow or projection of the
graph onto the y axis, we seem to be hitting our Y values from negative
five, up through three. So our range is wise between negative five
and three are an interval notation negative five, three with square brackets. If we meet
a function that's described as an equation instead of a graph, one way to find the domain
and range are to graph the function. But it's often possible to find the domain at least
more quickly, by using algebraic considerations. We think about what x values that makes sense
to plug into this expression, and what x values need to be excluded, because they make the
algebraic expression impossible to evaluate. Specifically, to find the domain of a function,
we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero. Since we can't divide by
zero, we also need to exclude x values that make
an expression inside a square root sign negative. Since we can't take the square root of a negative
number. In fact, we need to exclude values that make the expression inside any even root
negative because we can't take an even root of a negative number, even though we can take
an odd root like a cube root of a negative number. Later, when we look at logarithmic
functions, we'll have some additional exclusions that we have to make. But for now, these two
principles should handle all functions We'll see. So let's apply them to a couple examples. For the function in part A, we don't have
any square root signs, but we do have a denominator. So we need to exclude x values that make the
denominator zero. In other words, we need x squared minus 4x plus three to not be equal
to zero. If we solve x squared minus 4x plus three
equal to zero, we can do that by factoring. And that gives us x equals three or x equals
one, so we need to exclude these values. All other x values should be fine. So if I
draw the number line, I can put on one and three and just dig out a hole at both of those.
And my domain includes everything else on the number line. In interval notation, this
means my domain is everything from negative infinity to one, together with everything
from one to three, together with everything from three to infinity. In the second example, we don't have any denominator
to worry about, but we do have a square root sign. So we need to exclude any x values that
make three minus 2x less than zero. In other words, we can include all x values for which
three minus 2x is greater than or equal to zero. Solving that inequality gives us three
is greater than equal to 2x. In other words, x is less than or equal to three halves, I can draw this on the number line, or write it in interval notation. Notice that three halves is included, and
that's because three minus 2x is allowed to be zero, I can take the square root of zero,
that's just zero. And that's not a problem. Finally, let's look at a more complicated
function that involves both the square root and denominator. Now there are two things
I need to worry about. I need the denominator to not be equal to zero, and I need the stuff
inside the square root side to be greater than or equal to zero. from our earlier work,
we know the first condition means that x is not equal to three, and x is not equal to
one. And the second condition means that x is less than or equal to three halves. Let's
try both of those conditions on the number line. x is not equal to three and x is not equal
to one means we've got everything except those two dug out points. And the other condition
x is less than or equal to three halves means we can have three halves and everything To the left of it. Now to be in our domain
and to be legit for our function, we need both of these conditions to be true. So I'm
going to connect these conditions with N and N, that means we're looking for a numbers
on the number line that are colored both red and blue. So I'll draw that above in purple.
So that's everything from three halves to one, I have to dig out one because one was
a problem for the denominator. And then I can continue for all the things that are colored
both both colors red and blue. So my final domain is going to be, let's see negative
infinity, up to but not including one together with one, but not including it to three halves,
and I include three half since that was colored, both red and blue. Also, in this video, we talked about functions,
how to evaluate them, and how to find domains and ranges. This video gives the graphs of
some commonly used functions that I call the toolkit functions. The first function is the
function y equals x, let's plot a few points on the graph of this function. If x is zero,
y zero, if x is one, y is one, and so on y is always equal to x doesn't have to just
be an integer, it can be any real number, and we'll connecting the dots, we get a straight
line through the origin. Let's look at the graph of y equals x squared.
If x is zero, y is zero. So we go through the origin again, if x is one, y is one, and
x is negative one, y is also one, the x value of two gives a y value of four
and the x value of negative two gives a y value of four also connecting the dots, we
get a parabola. That is this, this function is an even function. That means it has mirror symmetry across the
y axis, the left side it looks like exactly like the mirror image of the right side. That
happens because when you square a positive number, like two, you get the exact same y
value as when you square it's a mirror image x value of negative two. The next function y equals x cubed. I'll call
that a cubic. Let's plot a few points when x is zero, y is zero. When x is one, y is
one, when x is negative one, y is negative one, two goes with the point eight way up
here and an x value of negative two is going to give us negative eight. If I connect the
dots, I get something that looks kind of like this. This function is what's called an odd function,
because it has 180 degree rotational symmetry occur around the origin. If I rotate this
whole graph by 180 degrees, or in other words, turn the paper upside down, I'll get exactly
the same shape. The reason this function has this odd symmetry is because when I cube a
positive number, and get its y value, I get n cube the corresponding negative number to
get its y value, the negative number cubed gives us exactly the negative of the the y
value we get with cubing the positive number. Let's look at the next example. Y equals the
square root of x. Notice that the domain of this function is
just x values bigger than or equal to zero because we can't take the square root of a
negative number. Let's plug in a few x values. X is zero gives y is 0x is one square root
of one is one, square root of four is two, and connecting the dots, I get a function
that looks like this. The absolute value function is next. Again,
if we plug in a few points, x is zero goes with y equals 0x is one gives us one, the
absolute value of negative one is 122 is on the graph, and the absolute value of negative
two is to I'm ending up getting a V shaped graph. It also has even or a mirror symmetry. Y equals two to the x is what's known as an
exponential function. That's because the variable x is in the exponent. If I plot a few points, two to the zero is one, two to the one is two, two squared is four,
two to the minus one is one half. I'll plot these on my graph, you know, let me fill in
a few more points. So let's see. two cubed is eight. That's way up here and negative
two gives Maybe 1/4 1/8 connecting the dots, I get something
that's shaped like this. You might have heard the expression exponential
growth, when talking about, for example, population growth, this is function is represents exponential
growth, it grows very, very steeply. Every time we increase the x coordinate by one,
we double the y coordinate. We could also look at a function like y equals
three dx, or sometimes y equals e to the x, where E is just a number about 2.7. These
functions look very similar. It's just the bigger bass makes us rise a little more steeply. Now let's look at the function y equals one
over x. It's not defined when x is zero, but I can plug in x equals one half, one over
one half is to whenever one is one, and one or two is one
half. By connect the dots, I get this shape in the first quadrant, but I haven't looked
at negative values of x, when x is negative, whenever negative one is negative one, whenever
negative half is negative two, and I get a similar looking piece in the third quadrant. This is an example of a hyperbola. And it's also an odd function, because it
has that 180 degree rotational symmetry, if I turn the page upside down, it'll look exactly
the same. Finally, let's look at y equals one over x squared. Again, it's not defined when x is zero, but
I can plug in points like one half or X, let's see one over one half squared is one over
1/4, which is four. And one over one squared, one over two squared
is a fourth, it looks pretty much like the previous function is just a little bit more
extreme rises a little more steeply, falls a little more dramatically. But for negative
values of x, something a little bit different goes on. For example, one over negative two
squared is just one over four, which is a fourth. So I can plot that point there, and
one over a negative one squared, that's just one. So my curve for negative values of x
is gonna lie in the second quadrant, not the third quadrant. This is an example of an even
function because it has perfect mirror symmetry across
the y axis. These are the toolkit functions, and I recommend
you memorize the shape of each of them. That way, you can draw at least a rough sketch
very quickly without having to plug in points. That's all for the graphs of the toolkit functions. If we change the equation of a function, then
the graph of the function changes or transforms in predictable ways. This video gives some rules and examples for
transformations of functions. To get the most out of this video, it's helpful if you're
already familiar with the graph of some typical functions, I call them toolkit functions like
y equals square root of x, y equals x squared, y equals the absolute value of x and so on.
If you're not familiar with those graphs, I encourage you to watch my video called toolkit
functions first, before watching this one. I want to start by reviewing function notation. If g of x represents the function, the square
root of x, then we can rewrite these expressions in terms of square roots. For example, g of
x minus two is the same thing as the square root of x minus two. g of quantity x minus two means we plug in
x minus two, everywhere we see an x, so that would be the same thing as the square root
of quantity x minus two. In this second example, I say that we're subtracting
two on the inside of the function, because we're subtracting two before we apply the
square root function. Whereas on the first example, I say that the minus two is on the
outside of the function, we're doing the square root function first and then subtracting two.
In this third example, g of 3x, we're multiplying by three on the inside of the function. To
evaluate this in terms of square root, we plug in the entire 3x for x and the square
root function. That gives us the square root of 3x. In the next example, we're multiplying by
three on the outside of the function. This is just three times the square root of x.
Finally, g of minus x means the square root of minus x. Now, this might look a little odd because
we're not used to taking the square root of a negative number. But remember that if x
itself is negative, like negative to the negative x will be negative negative two or positive
two. So we're really be taking the square root of a positive number in that case, let
me record which of these are inside and which of these are outside of my function. In this next set of examples, we're using
the same function g of x squared of x. But this time, we're starting with an expression
with square roots in it, and trying to write it in terms of g of x. So the first example,
the plus 17 is on the outside of my function, because I'm taking the square root of x first,
and then adding 17. So I can write this as g of x plus 17. In the second example, I'm taking x and adding
12 first, then I take the square root of the whole thing. Since I'm adding the 12 to x
first that's on the inside of my function. So I write that as g of the quantity x plus
12. Remember that this notation means I plug in
the entire x plus 12, into the square root sign, which gives me exactly square root of
x plus 12. And this next example, undoing the square root first and then multiplying
by negative 36. So i minus 36, multiplications, outside my function, I can rewrite this as
minus 36 times g of x. Finally, in this last example, I take x multiplied by a fourth and
then apply the square root of x. So that's the same thing as g of 1/4 X, my 1/4 X is
on the inside of my function. In other words, it's inside the parentheses when I use function
notation. Let's graph the square root of x and two transformations
have this function, y equals the square root of x goes to the
point 0011. And for two, since the square root of four is two, it looks something like
this. In order to graph y equals the square root
of x minus two, notice that the minus two is on the outside of the function, that means
we're going to take the square root of x first and then subtract two. So for example, if
we start with the x value of zero, and compute the square root of zero, that's zero, then
we subtract two to give us a y value of negative two, an x value of one, which under the square
root function had a y value of one now has a y value that's decreased by two, one minus
two is negative one. And finally, an x value of four, which under the square root function
had a y value of two now has a y value of two minus two or zero, its y value is also
decreased by two. If I plot these new points, zero goes with negative two, one goes with
negative one, and four goes with zero, I have my transformed graph. Because I subtracted two on the outside of
my function, my y values were decreased by two, which brought my graph down by two units.
Next, let's look at y equals the square root of quantity x minus two. Now we're subtracting
two on the inside of our function, which means we subtract two from x first and then take
the square root. In order to get the same y value of zero as we had in our blue graph,
we need our x minus two to be zero, so we need our original x to be two. In order to get the y value of one that we
had in our blue graph, we need to be taking the square root of one, so we need x minus
two to be one, which means that we need to start with an x value of three. And in order to reproduce our y value of two
from our original graph, we need the square root of x minus two to be two, which means
we need to start out by taking the square root of four, which means our x minus two
is four, so our x should be up there at six. If I plot my x values, with my corresponding
y values of square root of x minus two, I get the following graph. Notice that the graph
has moved horizontally to the right by two units. To me, moving down by two units, makes sense
because we're subtracting two, so we're decreasing y's by two units, but the minus two on the
inside that kind of does the opposite of what I expect, I might expected to to move the
graph left, I might expect the x values to be going down by two units, but instead, it
moves the graph to the right, because the x units have to go up by two units
in order to get the right square root when I then subtract two units again, the observations
we made for these transformations of functions hold in general, according to the following
rules. First of all, numbers on the outside of the function like In our example, y equals a squared of x minus
two, those numbers affect the y values. And a result in vertical motions, like we saw,
these motions are in the direction you expect. So subtracting two was just down by two. If
we were adding two instead, that would move us up by two numbers on the inside of the function. That's
like our example, y equals the square root of quantity x minus two, those affect the
x values and results in a horizontal motion, these motions go in the opposite direction
from what you expect. Remember, the minus two on the inside actually shifted our graph
to the right, if it had had a plus two on the inside, that would actually shift our
graph to the left. Adding results in a shift those are called
translations, but multiplying like something like y equals three times the square root
of x, that would result in a stretch or shrink. In other words, if I start with the square
root of x, and then when I graph y equals three times
the square root of x, that stretches my graph vertically by a factor of three. Like this, if I want to graph y equals 1/3, times the
square root of x, that shrinks my graph vertically by a factor of 1/3. Finally, a negative sign results in reflection.
For example, if I start with the graph of y equals the square root of x, and then when
I graph y equals the square root of negative x, that's going to do a reflection in the
horizontal direction because the negative is on the inside of the square root sign. A reflection in the horizontal direction means
a reflection across the y axis. If instead, I want to graph y equals negative
A squared of x, that negative sign on the outside means a vertical reflection, a reflection
across the x axis. Pause the video for a moment and see if you
could describe what happens in these four transformations. In the first example, we're subtracting four
on the outside of the function. adding or subtracting means a translation or shift.
And since we're on the outside of the function affects the y value, so that's moving us vertically.
So this transformation should take the square root of graph and move it down by four units,
that would look something like this. In the next example, we're adding 12 on the
inside, that's still a translation. But now we're moving horizontally. And so since we
go the opposite direction, we expect we are going to go to the left by 12 units, that's
going to look something like this. And the next example, we're multiplying by
three and introducing a negative sign both on the outside of our function outside our
function means we're affecting the y values. So in multiplication means we're stretching
by a factor of three, the negative sign means we reflect in the vertical direction, here's stretching by a factor of three vertically,
before I apply the minus sign, and now the minus sign reflects in the vertical direction. Finally, in this last example, we're multiplying
by one quarter on the inside of our function, we know that multiplication means stretch
or shrink. And since we're on the inside, it's a horizontal motion, and it does the
opposite of what we expect. So instead of shrinking by a factor of 1/4, horizontally,
it's actually going to stretch by the reciprocal, a factor of four horizontally. that'll look something like this. Notice that
stretching horizontally by a factor of four looks kind of like shrinking vertically by
a factor of one half. And that's actually borne out by the algebra,
because the square root of 1/4 x is the same thing as the square root of 1/4 times the
square root of x, which is the same thing as one half times the square root of x. And
so now we can see algebraically that vertical shrink by a factor of one half is the same
as a horizontal stretch by a factor of four, at least for this function, the square root
function. This video gives some rules for transformations
of functions, which I'll repeat below. numbers on the outside correspond to changes in the
y values, or vertical motions. numbers on the inside of the function, affect
the x values, and result in horizontal motions. Adding and subtracting corresponds to translations or shifts. multiplying and dividing by numbers corresponds
to stretches and shrinks and putting in a negative sign. corresponds to a reflection, horizontal reflection, if the negative sign
is on the inside, and a vertical reflection, if the negative sign is on the outside, knowing these basic rules about transformations
empowers you to be able to sketch graphs of much more complicated functions, like y equals
three times the square root of x plus two, by simply considering the transformations,
one at a time. a quadratic function is a function that can
be written in the form f of x equals A x squared plus bx plus c, where a, b and c are real
numbers. And a is not equal to zero. The reason we require that A is not equal to zero is
because if a were equal to zero, we'd have f of x is equal to b x plus c, which is called
a linear function. So by making sure that a is not zero, we make sure there's really
an x squared term which is the hallmark of a quadratic function. Please pause the video for a moment and decide
which of these equations represent quadratic functions. The first function can definitely be written
in the form g of x equals A x squared plus bx plus c. fact it's already written in that
form, where a is negative five, B is 10, and C is three. The second equation is also a quadratic function,
because we can think of it as f of x equals one times x squared plus zero times x plus
zero. So it is in the right form, where A is one,
B is zero, and C is zero. It's perfectly fine for the coefficient of
x and the constant term to be zero for a quadratic function, we just need the coefficient of
x squared to be nonzero, so the x squared term is preserved. The third equation is not a quadratic function.
It's a linear function, because there's no x squared term. The fourth function might not look like a
quadratic function. But if we rewrite it by expanding out the X minus three squared, let's
see what happens. We get y equals two times x minus three times x minus three plus four.
So that's two times x squared minus 3x minus 3x, plus nine plus four, continuing, I get
2x squared, minus 12 access, plus 18 plus four, in other
words, y equals 2x squared minus 12x plus 22. So in fact, our function can be written
in the right form, and it is a quadratic function. A function that is already written in the
form y equals A x squared plus bx plus c is said to be in standard form. So our first example g of x is in standard
form a function that's written in the format of
the last function that is in the form of y equals a times x minus h squared plus k for
some numbers, a, h, and K. That said to be in vertex form, I'll talk more about standard form and vertex
form in another video. In this video, we identified some quadratic
functions, and talked about the difference between standard form and vertex form. This video is about graphing quadratic functions.
a quadratic function, which is typically written in standard form, like this, or sometimes
in vertex form, like this, always has the graph that looks like a parabola. This video will show how to tell whether the
problem is pointing up or down. How to find its x intercepts, and how to find its vertex. The bare bones basic quadratic function is
f of x equals x squared, it goes to the origin, since f of zero is zero squared, which is
zero, and it is a parabola pointing upwards like this. The vertex of a parabola is its lowest point
if it's pointing upwards, and its highest point if it's pointing downwards. So in this
case, the vertex is at 00. The x intercepts are where the graph crosses
the x axis. In other words, where y is zero In this function, y equals zero means that
x squared is zero, which happens only when x is zero. So the x intercept, there's only
one of them is also zero. The second function, y equals negative 3x
squared also goes to the origin. Since the functions value when x is zero, is y equals
zero. But in this case, the parabola is pointing downwards. That's because thinking about transformations
of functions, a negative sign on the outside reflects the function vertically over the
x axis, making the problem instead of pointing upwards, reflecting the point downwards. The number three on the outside stretches
the graph vertically by a factor of three. So it makes it kind of long and skinny like
this. In general, a negative coefficient to the
x squared term means the problem will be pointing down. Whereas a positive coefficient, like
here, the coefficients, one means the parabola is pointing up. Alright, that roll over here. So if a is bigger than zero, the parabola
opens up. And if the value of the coefficient a is less
than zero, then the parabola opens down. In this second example, we can see again that
the vertex is at 00. And the x intercept is x equals zero. Let's look at this third example. If we multiplied our expression out, we'd
see that the coefficient of x squared would be to a positive number. So that means our
parabola is going to be opening up. But the vertex of this parabola will no longer
be at the origin. In fact, we can find the parabolas vertex by thinking about transformations
of functions. Our function is related to the function y
equals to x squared, by moving it to the right by three and up by four. Since y equals 2x
squared has a vertex at 00. If we move that whole parabola including the vertex, right
by three, and up by four, the vertex will end up at the point three, four. So a parabola will look something like this. Notice how easy it was to just read off the
vertex when our quadratic function is written in this form. In fact, any parabola any quadratic
function written in the form a times x minus h squared plus k has a vertex at h k. By the
same reasoning, we're moving the parabola with a vertex at the origin to the right by
H, and by K. That's why this form of a quadratic function
is called the vertex form. Notice that this parabola has no x intercepts
because it does not cross the x axis. For our final function, we have g of x equals
5x squared plus 10x plus three, we know the graph of this function will be
a parabola pointing upwards, because the coefficient of x squared is positive. To find the x intercepts, we can set y equals
zero, since the x intercepts is where our graph crosses the x axis, and that's where
the y value is zero. So zero equals 5x squared plus 10x plus three,
I'm going to use the quadratic formula to solve that. So x is negative 10 plus or minus
the square root of 10 squared minus four times five times three, all over two times five.
That simplifies to x equals negative 10 plus or minus the square root of 40 over 10, which simplifies further to x equals negative
10 over 10, plus or minus the square root of 40 over 10, which is negative one plus
or minus two square root of 10 over 10, or negative one plus or minus square root of
10 over five. Since the square root of 10 is just a little
bit bigger than three, this works out to approximately about negative two fifths and negative eight
foot or so somewhere around right here. So our parabola is going to look something like
this. Notice that it goes through crosses the x axis at y equals three, that's because
when we plug in x equals zero, and two here we get y equal three, so the y intercept is
at three. Finally, we can find the vertex. Since this function is written in standard
form, On the Y equals a x plus a squared plus bx
plus c form, and not in vertex form, we can't just read off the vertex like we couldn't
before. But there's a trick called the vertex formula, which says that whenever you have
a function in a quadratic function in standard form, the vertex has an x coordinate of negative B over two A. So in this case,
that's an x coordinate of negative 10 over two times five or negative one, which is kind
of like where I put it on the graph. To find the y coordinate of that vertex, I can just
plug in negative one into my equation for x, which gives me at y equals five times negative
one squared, plus 10, times negative one plus three, which is negative two. So I think I better redraw my graph a little
bit to put that vertex down at a y coordinate of negative two where it's supposed to be. Let's summarize the steps we use to graph
these quadratic functions. First of all, the graph of a quadratic function has the shape
of a parabola. The parabola opens up, if the coefficient
of x squared, which we'll call a is greater than zero and down if a is less than zero.
To find the x intercepts, we set y equal to zero, or in other words, f of x equal to zero
and solve for x, the find the vertex, we can either read it off as h k, if our function
is in vertex form, or we can use the vertex formula and get the x coordinate of the vertex to be negative B over to a if
our function is in standard form. To find the y coordinate of the vertex in
this case, we just plug in the x coordinate and figure out what y is. Finally, we can always find additional points
on the graph by plugging in values of x. In this video, we learned some tricks for
graphing quadratic functions. In particular, we saw that the vertex can be read off as
h k, if our function is written in vertex form, and the x coordinate of the vertex can
be calculated as negative B over two A, if our function
is in standard form. For an explanation of why this vertex formula works, please see
the my other video. a quadratic and standard form looks like y
equals A x squared plus bx plus c, where a, b and c are real numbers, and a is not zero.
a quadratic function in vertex form looks like y equals a times x minus h squared plus
k, where a h and k are real numbers, and a is not zero. When a functions in vertex form,
it's easy to read off the vertex is just the ordered pair, H, okay. This video explains how to get from vertex
form two standard form and vice versa. Let's start by converting this quadratic function
from vertex form to standard form. That's pretty straightforward, we just have to distribute
out. So if I multiply out the X minus three squared, I get minus four times x squared minus 6x
plus nine plus one, distributing the negative four, I get negative 4x squared plus 24x minus
36 plus one. So that works out to minus 4x squared plus 24x minus 35. And I have my quadratic
function now in standard form. Now let's go the other direction and convert
a quadratic function that's already in standard form into vertex form. That is, we want to
put it in the form of g of x equals a times x minus h squared plus k, where the vertex
is at h k. To do this, it's handy to use the vertex formula. The vertex formula says that the x coordinate
of the vertex is given by negative over to a, where A is the coefficient of x
squared, and B is the coefficient of x. So in this case, we get an x coordinate of negative
eight over two times two or negative two. To find the y coordinate of the vertex, we
just plug in the x coordinate into our formula for a g of x. So that's g of negative two,
which is two times negative two squared plus eight times negative two plus six. And that
works out to be negative two by coincidence. So the vertex for our quadratic function has
coordinates negative two, negative two. And if I want to write g of x in vertex form,
it's going to be a times x minus negative two squared plus minus two. That's because
remember, we subtract H and we add K. So that simplifies to g of x equals a times x plus
two squared minus two. And finally, we just need to figure out what this leading coefficient
as. But notice, if we were to multiply, distribute this out, then the coefficient of x squared
would end up being a. So therefore, the coefficient of x squared here, which is a has to be the
same as the coefficient of x squared here, which we conveniently also called a, in other
words, are a down here needs to be two. So I'm going to write that as g of x equals two
times x plus two squared minus two, lots of twos in this problem. And that's our quadratic
function in vertex form. If I want to check my answer, of course, I could just distribute
out again, I'd get two times x squared plus 4x, plus two, minus two, in other words, 2x
squared plus 8x plus six, which checks out to exactly what I started with. This video
showed how to get from vertex form to standard form by distributing out and how to get from
standard form to vertex form by finding the vertex using the vertex formula. Suppose you have a quadratic function in the
form y equals x squared plus bx plus c, and you want to find where the vertex is, when
you graph it. The vertex formula says that the x coordinate
of this vertex is that negative B over two A, this video gives a justification for where
that formula comes from. Let's start with a specific example. Suppose
I wanted to find the x intercepts and the vertex for this quadratic function. To find
the x intercepts, I would set y equal to zero and solve for x. So that's zero equals 3x
squared plus 7x minus five. And to solve for x, I use the quadratic formula. So x is going
to be negative seven plus or minus the square root of seven squared minus four times three
times negative five, all over two times three. That simplifies to negative seven plus or
minus a squared of 109 over six, we could, I could also write this as negative seven,
six, plus the square root of 109 over six, or x equals negative seven, six minus the
square root of 109 over six, since the square root of 109 is just a little bit bigger than
10, this can be approximated by negative seven six plus 10, six, and negative seven, six
minus 10, six. So pretty close to, I guess about what half
over here and pretty close to about negative three over here, I'm just going to estimate
so that I can draw a picture of the function. Since the leading coefficient three is positive,
I know my parabola is going to be opening up and the intercepts are somewhere around
here and here. So roughly speaking, it's gonna look something like this. Now the vertex is going to be somewhere in
between the 2x intercepts, in fact, it's going to be by symmetry, it'll be exactly halfway
in between the 2x intercepts. Since the x intercepts are negative seven, six plus and
minus 100 squared of 109 over six, the number halfway in between those is going to be exactly
negative seven, six, right, because on the one hand, I have negative
seven six plus something. And on the other hand, I have negative seven six minus that
same thing. So negative seven, six will be exactly in
the middle. So my x coordinate of my vertex will be at negative seven sex. Notice that
I got that number from the quadratic formula. More generally, if I want to find the x intercepts
for any quadratic function, I set y equal to zero and solve for x using the quadratic formula,
negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four AC Oliver to a, b, x
intercepts will be at these two values, but the x coordinate of the vertex, which is exactly
halfway in between the 2x intercepts will be at negative B over two A. That's where
the vertex formula comes from. And it turns out that this formula works even
when there are no x intercepts, even when the quadratic formula gives us no solutions.
That vertex still has the x coordinate, negative B over two A. And that's the justification of the vertex
formula. This video is about polynomials and their
graphs. We call that a polynomial is a function like
this one, for example. His terms are numbers times powers of x. I'll
start with some definitions. The degree of a polynomial is the largest exponent. For
example, for this polynomial, the degree is for the leading term is the term with the largest
exponent. In the same example, the leading term is 5x to the fourth, it's conventional
to write the polynomial in descending order of powers of x. So the leading term is first.
But the leading term doesn't have to be the first term. If I wrote the same polynomial
as y equals, say, two minus 17x minus 21x cubed plus 5x. Fourth, the leading term would
still be the 5x to the fourth, even though it was last. The leading coefficient is the number in the
leading term. In this example, the leading coefficient is five. Finally, the constant term is the term with
no x's in it. In our same example, the constant term is to please pause the video for a moment and take
a look at this next example of polynomial figure out what's the degree the leading term,
the leading coefficient and the constant term. The degree is again, four, since that's the
highest power we have, and the leading term is negative 7x. to the fourth, the leading
coefficient is negative seven, and the constant term is 18. In the graph of the polynomial Shown here
are the three marks points are called turning points, because the polynomial turns around
and changes direction at those three points, those same points can also be called local
extreme points, or they can be called local maximum and minimum points. For this polynomial,
the degree is four, and the number of turning points is three. Let's compare the degree and the number of
turning points for these next three examples. For the first one, the degree is to and there's
one turning point. For the second example, that agree, is three,
and there's two turning points. And for this last example, the degree is four,
and there's one turning point. For this first example, and the next two,
the number of turning points is exactly one less than the degree. So you might conjecture
that this is always true. But in fact, this is not always true. In this last example,
the degree is four, but the number of turning points is one, not three. In fact, it turns out that while the number
of turning points is not always equal to a minus one, it is always less than or equal
to the degree minus one. That's a useful factor. Remember, when you're sketching graphs are
recognizing graphs of polynomials. The end behavior of a function is how the
ends of the function look, as x gets bigger and bigger heads towards infinity, or x gets
goes through larger and larger negative numbers towards negative infinity. In this first example, the graph of the function
goes down as x gets towards infinity as x goes towards negative infinity. I can draw
this with two little arrows pointing Down on either side, or I can say in words,
that the function is falling as we had left and falling also as we had right. In the second example, the graph rises to
the left and rises to the right. In the third example, the graph falls to the left, but
rises to the right. And in the fourth example, it rises to the left and falls to the right.
If you study these examples, and others, you might notice there's a relationship between
the degree of the polynomial the leading coefficients of the polynomials and the end behavior. Specifically,
these four types of end behavior are determined by whether the degree is even or odd. And
by whether the leading coefficient is positive or negative. When the degree is even, and the leading coefficient
is positive, like in this example, where the leading coefficient is one, we have this sorts
of n behavior rising on both sides. When the degree is even at the leading coefficient
is negative, like in this example, we have the end behavior that's falling on both sides when the degree is odd, and the leading coefficient
is positive, that's like this example, with the degree three and the leading coefficient
three, then we have this sort of end behavior. And finally, when the degree is odd, and the
leading coefficient is negative, like in this example, we have this sort of NBA havior. I like to remember this chart just by thinking
of the most simple examples, y equals x squared, y equals negative x squared, y equals x cubed,
and y equals negative x cubed. Because I know by heart what those four examples look like, then I just have to remember that any polynomial
with a even degree and positive leading coefficient has the same end behavior as x squared. And similarly, any polynomial with even degree
and negative leading coefficient has the same end behavior as negative x squared. And similar
statements for x cubed and negative x cubed. We can use facts about turning points and
behavior, to say something about the equation of a polynomial just by looking at this graph. In this example, because of the end behavior,
we know that the degree is odd, we know that the leading coefficient must be positive. And finally, since there are 1234, turning
points, we know that the degree is greater than or equal to five. That's because the number of turning points
is less than or equal to the degree minus one. And in this case, the number of turning
points we said was four. And so solving that inequality, we get the
degree is bigger than equal to five. Put in some of that information together,
we see the degree could be five, or seven, or nine, or any odd number
greater than or equal to five. But it couldn't be for example, three or six. Because even
numbers and and also numbers less than five are right out. This video gave a lot of definitions, including
the definition of degree leading coefficients, turning points, and and behavior. We saw that knowing the degree and the leading
coefficient can help you make predictions about the number of turning points and the
end behavior, as well as vice versa. This video is about exponential functions
and their graphs. an exponential function is a function that
can be written in the form f of x equals a times b to the x, where a and b are any real
numbers. As long as a is not zero, and B is positive. It's important to notice that for an exponential
function, the variable x is in the exponent. This is different from many other functions
we've seen, for example, quite a quadratic function like f of x equals 3x squared has
the variable in the base, so it's not an exponential function. For exponential functions, f of x equals a
times b dx. We require that A is not equal to zero, because otherwise, we would have
f of x equals zero times b dx. Which just means that f of x equals zero.
And this is called a constant function, not an exponential function. Because f of x is
always equal to zero in an exponential function, but we require
that B is bigger than zero, because otherwise, for example, if b is equal to negative one,
say, we'd have f of x equals a times negative one to the x. Now, this would make sense for
a lot of values of x. But if we try to do something like f of one half, with our Bs,
negative one, that would be the same thing as a times the square root of negative one,
which is not a real number, we'd get the same problem for other values
of b, if the values of b were negative. And if we tried b equals zero, we'd get a kind
of ridiculous thing a times zero to the x, which again is always zero. So that wouldn't
count as an exponential either. So we can't use any negative basis, and we can't use zero
basis, if we want an exponential function. The number A in the expression f of x equals
a times b to the x is called the initial value. And the number B is called the base. The phrase initial value comes from the fact
that if we plug in x equals zero, we get a times b to the zero, well, anything to the
zero is just one. So this is equal to A. In other words, f of zero equals a. So if we
think of starting out, when x equals zero, we get the y value of a, that's why it's called the initial value. Let's start out with this example, where y
equals a times b to the x next special function, and we've set a equal to one and B equals
a two. Notice that the y intercept, the value when x is zero, is going to be one. If I change my a value, my initial value,
the y intercept changes, the function is stretched out. If I make the value of a go to zero, and then
negative, then my initial value becomes negative, and
my graph flips across the x axis. Let's go back to an a value of say one, and see what
happens when we change B. Right now, the B value the basis two, if I increase B, my y
intercept sticks at one, but my graph becomes steeper and steeper. If I put B back down
close to one, my graph becomes more flat at exactly one, my graph is just a constant. As B gets into fractional territory, point
8.7 point six, my graph starts to slope the other way, it's decreasing now instead of
increasing, but notice that the y intercept still hasn't changed, I can get it more and
more steep as my B gets farther and farther away from one of course, when B goes to negative
territory, my graph doesn't make any sense. So a changes the y intercept, and B changes
the steepness of the graph. So that it's added whether it's increasing for B values bigger
than one, and decreasing for values of the less than one. we'll summarize all these observations on
the next slide. We've seen that for an exponential function,
y equals a times b to the x, the parameter or number a gives the y intercept, the parameter
B tells us how the graph is increasing or decreasing. Specifically, if b is greater
than one, the graph is increasing. And if b is less than one, the graph is decreasing. The closer B is to the number one, the flatter
the graph. So for example, if I were to graph y equals
point two five to the x and y equals point four to the x, they would both be decreasing
graphs, since the base for both of them is less than one. But point two five is farther
away from one and point four is closer to one. So point four is going to be flatter.
And point two five is going to be more steep. So in this picture,
This red graph would correspond to point two five to the x, and the blue graph would correspond
to point four to the x. For all these exponential functions, whether the graphs are decreasing
or increasing, they all have a horizontal asymptote along the x axis. In other words,
at the line at y equals zero, the domain is always from negative infinity to infinity,
and the range is always from zero to infinity, because the range is always positive y values.
Actually, that's true. If a is greater than zero, if a is less than zero, then our graph
flips over the x axis, our domain stays the same, but our range becomes negative infinity
to zero. The most famous exponential function is f of x equals e to the x. This function
is also sometimes written as f of x equals x of x. The number E is Oilers number as approximately
2.7. This function has important applications to calculus and to some compound interest
problems. In this video, we looked at exponential functions, functions of the form a times b
to the x, where the variable is in the exponent, we saw that they all have the same general
shape, either increasing like this, or decreasing like this, unless a is negative, in which
case they flip over the x axis. They all have a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, the
x axis. In this video, we'll use exponential functions to model real world examples. Let's
suppose you're hired for a job. The starting salary is $40,000. With a guaranteed annual
raise of 3% each year, how much will your salary be after one year, two years, five
years. And in general after two years, let me chart out the information. The left column
will be the number of years since you're hired. And the right column will be your salary.
When you start work, at zero years after you're hired, your salary will be $40,000. After
one year, you'll have gotten a 3% raise. So your salary will be the original 40,000 plus
3% of 40,000.03 times 40,000. I can think of this first number as one at times 40,000.
And I can factor out the 40,000 from both terms, to get 40,000 times one plus 0.03.
we rewrite this as 40,000 times 1.03. This is your original salary multiplied by a growth
factor of 1.03. After two years, you'll get a 3% raise from your previous year salary,
your previous year salary was 40,000 times 1.03. But you'll add 3% of that, again, I can think of the first
number is one times 40,000 times 1.03. And I can factor out the common factor of 40,000
times 1.03 from both terms, to get 40,000 times 1.03 times one plus 0.03. Let me rewrite
that as 40,000 times 1.03 times 1.03 or 40,000 times 1.3 squared. We can think of this as
your last year salary multiplied by the same growth factor of 1.03. After three years,
a similar computation will give you that your new salary is your previous year salary times
that growth factor of 1.03 that can be written as 40,000 times 1.03 cubed. And in general,
if you're noticing the pattern, after two years, your salary should be 40,000 times
1.03 to the t power. In other words, your salary after two years is your original salary
multiplied By the growth factor of 1.03, taken to the t power, let me write this as a formula
s of t, where S of t is your salary is equal to 40,000 times 1.03 to the T. This is an
exponential function, that is a function of the form a times b to the T, where your initial
value a is 40,000 and your base b is 1.03. Notice that your base is the amount that your
salary gets multiplied by each year. Given this formula, we can easily figure out what
your salary will be after, for example, five years by plugging in five for T. I worked
that out on my calculator to be $46,370.96 to the nearest cent. exponential functions
are also useful in modeling population growth. The United Nations estimated that the world
population in 2010 was 6.7 9 billion growing at a rate of 1.1% per year. Assuming that
the growth rate stayed the same and will continue to stay the same, we'll write an equation
for the population at t years after the year 2010 1.1%, written as a decimal is 0.011.
So if we work out a chart as before, we see that after zero years since 2010, we have
our initial population 6.7 9 billion, after one year, we'll take that 6.7 9 billion and
add 1.1% of it. That is point 011 times 6.79. This works out to 6.79 times one plus point
011 or 6.79 times 1.011. Here we have our initial population of 6.7 9 billion, and our
growth factor of 1.011. That's how much the population got multiplied by in one year.
As before, we can work out that after two years, our population becomes 6.79 times 1.011
squared, since they got multiplied by 1.011, twice, and after two years, it'll be 6.79
times 1.011 to the t power. So our function that models population is going to be 6.79
times 1.011 to the T. Here, t represents time in years, since 2010. Just for fun, I'll plug
in t equals 40. That's 40 years since 2010. So that's the year 2050. And I get 6.79 times
1.011 to the 40th power, which works out to 10 point 5 billion. That's the prediction
based on this exponential model. The previous two examples were examples of
exponential growth. This last example is an example of exponential decay. The drugs Seroquel
is metabolized and eliminated from the body at a rate of 11% per hour. If 400 milligrams
are given how much remains in the body. 24 hours later, I'll chart out my information
where the left column will be time in hours since the dose was given, and the right column
will be the number of milligrams of Seroquel still on the body. zero hours after the dose
is given, we have the full 400 milligrams in the body. One hour later, we have the formula
100 milligrams minus 11% of it, that's minus point one one times 400. If I factor out the
400 from both terms, I get 400 times one minus 0.11 or 400 times point eight nine. The 400
represents the initial amount. The point eight nine I'll call the growth factor, even though
in this case the quantity is decreasing, not growing. So really it's kind of a shrink factor.
Let's see what happens after two hours. Now I'll have 400 times 0.89 my previous amount,
it'll again get multiplied by point eight, nine, so that's going to be 400 times 0.89
squared. And in general, after t hours, I'll have 400 multiplied by this growth or shrinkage
factor of point eight nine, raised to the t power. Since each hour, the amount of Seroquel
gets multiplied by point eight, nine, that number less than one. All right, my exponential
decay function as f of t equals 400 times 0.89 to the T, where f of t represents the
number of milligrams of Seroquel in the body. And t represents the number of hours since
the dose was given. To find out how much is in the body after 24 hours, I just plug in
24 for t. This works out to about 24.4 milligrams, I hope you notice the common form for the
functions used to model all three of these examples. The functions are always in the
form f of t equals a times b to the T, where a represented the initial amount, and B represented
the growth factor. To find the growth factor B, we started with the percent increase or
decrease. We wrote it as a decimal. And then we either added or subtracted it from one,
depending on whether the quantity was increasing or decreasing. Let me show you that as a couple
examples. In the first example, we had a percent increase of 3% on the race as a decimal, I'll
call this r, this was point O three. And to get the growth factor, we added that to one
to get 1.03. In the world population example, we had a 1.1% increase, we wrote this as point
011 and added it to one to get 1.011. In the drug example, we had a decrease of 11%. We
wrote that as a decimal. And we subtracted the point one one from one to get 0.89. In
fact, you can always write the growth factor B as one plus the percent change written as
a decimal. If you're careful to make that percent change, negative when the quantity
is decreasing and positive when the quantity is increasing. Since here one plus negative
point 11 gives us the correct growth factor of point
eight nine which is less than one as a good check. Remember that if your quantity is increasing,
the base b should be bigger than one. And if the quantity is decreasing, then B should
be less than one. exponential functions can also be used to
model bank accounts and loans with compound interest, as we'll see in another video. This
video is about interpreting exponential functions. An antique car is worth $50,000 now, and its
value increases by 7%. Each year, let's write an equation to model its value x years from
now. After one year, it's value is the 50,000 plus 0.07 times the 50,000. That's because
its value has grown by 7% or point oh seven times 50,000. this can be written as 50,000
times one plus point O seven. Notice that adding 7% to the original value is the same
as multiplying the original value by one plus point oh seven or by 1.07. After two years,
the value will be 50,000 times one plus 0.07 squared, or 50,000 times 1.07 squared. That's
because the previous year's value is multiplied again by 1.7. In general, after x years We
have x, the antique cars value will be 50,000 times 1.07 to the x. That's because the original
value of 50,000 gets multiplied by 1.07x times one time for each year. If we dissect this
equation, we see that the number of 50,000 comes from the original value of the car.
The one point is seven, which I call the growth factor comes from one plus point 707. The
point O seven being the, the percent increase written as a decimal. So the form of this
equation is an exponential equation, V of x equals a times b to the x, where A is the
initial value, and B is the growth factor. But we could also write this as a times one
plus r to the x, where A is still the initial value, but R is the percent increase written as a decimal.
This same equation will come up in the next example, here, my Toyota Prius is worth only
3000. Now, and its value is decreasing by 5% each year. So after one year, its value
will be 3000 minus 0.05 times 3000. That is 3000 times one minus 0.05. I can also write
that as 3000 times 0.95. Decreasing the value by 5% is like multiplying the value by one
minus point oh five, or by point nine, five. After two years, the value will be multiplied
by point nine five again. So the value will be 3000 times point nine, five squared. And
after x years, the value will be 3000 times point nine five to the x. So my equation for
the value is 3000 times point nine five to the x. This is again, an equation of the form
V of x equals a times b to the x, where here, a is 3000, the initial value, and B is point
nine, five, I'll still call that the growth factor, even though we're actually declining
value not growing. Now remember where this point nine five came from, it came from taking
one and subtracting point 05, because of the 5%, decrease in value, so I can again, write
my equation in the form a times well, this time times one minus r to the x, where R is
our point 05. That's our percent decrease written as a decimal. Please take a moment
to study this equation and the previous one. They say that when you have an exponential
function, the number here is the initial value. If it's written in this form, B is your growth
factor. But you can think of B as being either one minus r, where r is the percent decrease,
or one plus r, where r is the percent increase. In this example, we're given a function f
of x to model the number of bacteria in a petri dish x hours after 12 o'clock noon,
we want to know what was the number of bacteria at noon, and by what percent, the number of
bacteria is increasing every hour, we can see from the equation that the number of bacteria
is increasing and not decreasing, because the base of the exponential function 1.45
is bigger than one. Notice that our equation f of x equals 12 times 1.45 to the X has the
form of a times b to the x, or we can think of it as a times one plus r to the x. Here
a is 12, b is 1.45 and r is 0.45. Based on this familiar form, we can recognize that
the initial amount of bacteria is going to be 12 12,000. Since those are our units and
this value 1.45 is our growth factor. What the number of bacteria is multiplied by each
hour? Well are the point four five is the the rate of increase, in other words, a 45%
increase each hour. So our answers to the questions are 12,045%. In this example, the
population of salamanders is modeled by this exponential function, where x is the number
of years since 2015. Notice that the number of salamanders is decreasing, because the
base of our exponential function point seven, eight is less than one. So if we recognize
the form of our exponential function, a times b to the x, or we can think of this as a times
one minus r to the x, where A is our initial value, and r is our percent decrease written
as a decimal. Our initial value is 3000. So that's the number
of salamanders zero years after 2015. Our growth factor B is 0.78. But if I write that
as one minus r, I see that R has to be one minus 0.78, or 0.22. In other words, our population
is decreasing by 22% each year. In this video, we saw that exponential functions can be written
in the form f of x equals a times b to the x, where A is the initial value. And B is
the growth factor. We also saw that they can be written in the form a times one plus r
to the x when the amount is increasing. And as a times one minus r to the x when the amount
is decreasing. In this format, R is the percent increase or the percent decrease written as
a decimal. So 15% increase will be an R value of 0.15 and a growth factor B of 1.15. Whereas
a 12% decrease will be an R value of point one, two, and a B value of one minus point
one, two, or 0.7. Sorry, 0.88. These observations help us quickly interpret exponential functions.
For example, here, we have an initial value of 100 and a 15% increase. And here, we have
an initial value of 50 and a 40%. decrease. exponential functions can be used to model
compound interest for loans and bank accounts. Suppose you invest $200 in a bank account
that earns 3% interest every year. If you make no deposits or withdrawals, how much
money will you have accumulated after 10 years, because 3% of the money that's in the bank
is getting added each year, the money in the bank gets multiplied by 1.03 each year. So
after one year, the amount will be 200 times 1.3, after two years 200 times one point O
three squared, and and after t years 200 times one point O three to the t power. So the function
modeling the amount of money, I'll call it P of t is given by 200 times 1.03 to the T.
More generally, if you invest a dollars at an annual interest rate of our for t years.
In the end, you'll have P of t equals a times one plus r to the T here r needs to be written as a decimal, so
0.03 In our example, for the 3% annual interest rate. Going back to our specific example,
After 10 years, the amount of money is going to be P of 10 which is 200 times 1.03 to the
10 which works out to 206 $68.78 to the nearest cent. In this problem, we've assumed that
the interest accumulates once per year. But in the next few examples, we'll see what happens
when the interest rate accumulates more frequently, twice a year, or every month. For example,
let's deposit $300 in an account that earns 4.5% annual interest compounded semi annually,
this means two times a year or every six months. A 4.5% annual interest rate compounded two
times a year means that we're actually getting 4.5 over 2% interest, every time the interest
is compounded. That is every six months. That's 2.25% interest every half a year. Note that
2.25% is the same as 0.02 to five as a decimal. So every time we earn interest, our money
gets multiplied by 1.02 to five. Let me make a chart of what happens. After zero years,
which is also zero half years, we have our original $300. for half a year, that's one
half year, our money gets earns interest one time, so we multiply the 300 by 1.02 to five,
after one year, that's two half years, our money earns interest two times. So we multiply
300 by 1.0225 squared. continuing this way, after 1.5 years, that's three half years,
we have 300 times 1.02 to five cubed. And after two years or four half years, we have
300 times 1.02 to five to the fourth. In general, after t years, which is to T half years, our
money will grow to 300 times 1.02 to five to the two t power. Because we've compounded
interest to tee times our formula for our amount of money is P of t equals 300 times
one point O two to five to the two t where t is the number of years. To finish the problem,
after seven years, we'll have P of $7, which is 300 times 1.02 to five to the two times
seven or 14 power. And that works out to $409.65 to the nearest cent. In this next example,
we're going to take out a loan for $1,200 in annual interest rate of 6% compounded monthly.
Although loans and bank accounts might feel different, they're mathematically the same.
It's like from the bank's point of view, they're investing money in you and getting interest
on their money from you. So we can work them out with the same kind of math 6% annual interest
rate compounded monthly means you're compounding 12 times a year. So each time you compound
interest, you're just going to get six over 12% interest. That's point 5% interest. And
as a decimal, that's 0.005. Let's try it out again, what happens. Time is zero, of course,
you'll have the original loan amount of 1200. After one year, that's 12 months, your loan
has had interest added to it 12 times so it gets multiplied by 1.05 to the 12th. After two years, that's 24 months, it's had
interest added to it 24 times, so it gets multiplied by 1.05 to the 24th power. Similarly,
after three years or 36 months, your loan amount will be 1200 times 1.05 to the 36th
power. And in general, after two years, that's 12 t months. So the interest will be compounded
12 t times and so we have to raise the 1.05 To the 12 t power. This gives us the general
formula for the money owed is P of t equals 1200 times 1.05 to the 12 T, where T is the
number of years. In particular, after three years, we'll have to pay back a total of 1200
times 1.05 to the 12 times three or 36 power, which works out to $1,436.02 to the nearest
cent. These last two problems follow a general pattern. If A is the initial amount of the
loan or bank account, and r is the annual interest rate, compounded n times per year,
then our formula for the amount of money is going to be a times one plus r over n to the
n t. This formula exactly matches what we did in this problem. First, we took the interest
rate our which was 6%, and divided it by the number of compounding periods each year 12.
We wrote that as a decimal and added one to it. That's where we got the 1.05 from. We
raised this to not to the number of years, but to 12 times the number of years. That's
the number of compounding periods per year, times the number of years. And we multiplied
all that by the initial amount of money, which was 1200. This formula for compound interest
is a good one to memorize. But it's also important to be able to reason your way through it,
like we did in this chart. There's one more type of compound interest. And that's interest
compounded continuously. You can think of continuous compounding as the limit of compounding
more and more frequently 10 times a year, 100 times a year 1000 times a year a million
times a year. In the limit, you get continuous compounding. The formula for continuous compounding
is P of t equals a times e to the RT, where p of t is the amount of money, t is the time
in years. A is the initial amount of money. And R is the annual interest rate written
as a decimal. So 0.025 in this problem from the 2.5% annual interest rate. He represents
the famous constant Oilers constant, which is about 2.718. So in this problem, we have
P of t is 4000 times e to the 0.025 T. And after five years, we'll have P of five, which
is 4000 times e to the 0.0 to five times five, which works out to $4,532.59 to the nearest
cent. To summarize, if R represents the annual interest rate written as a decimal, that is
2% would be 0.02. And t represents the number of years and a represents the initial amount
of money, then for just simple annual interest compounded once a year. Our formula is P of
t is a times one plus r to the T for compound interest compounded n times per year. Our
formula is P of t is a times one plus r over n to the n T. And for compound interest compounded
continuously, we get P of t is a times e to the RT. In this video, we looked at three kinds of
compound interest problems, simple annual interest, interest compounded and times per
year, and continuously compounded interest. This video introduces logarithms. logarithms
are a way of writing exponents. The expression log base a of B equals c means that a to the
C equals b. In other words, log base a of B is the exponent that you raise a to to get
BE THE NUMBER A It is called the base of the logarithm. It's also called the base when
we write it in this exponential form. Some students find it helpful to remember this
relationship. log base a of B equals c means a to the C equals b, by drawing arrows, a to the C equals b. Other students like to think of it in terms
of asking a question, log base a of B, asks, What power do you raise a to in order to get
b? Let's look at some examples. log base two of eight is three, because two to the three
equals eight. In general, log base two of y is asking you the question, What power do
you have to raise to to to get y? So for example, log base two of 16 is four, because it's asking
you the question to what power equals 16? And the answer is four. Please pause the video
and try some of these other examples. log base two of two is asking, What power do you
raise to two to get two? And the answer is one. Two to the one equals two. log base two
of one half is asking two to what power gives you one half? Well, to get one half, you need
to raise two to a negative power. So that would be two to the negative one. So the answer
is negative one. log base two of 1/8 means what power do we raise to two in order to
get 1/8. Since 1/8, is one over two cubed, we have to raise two to the negative three
power to get one over two cubed. So our exponent is negative three. And that's our answer to
our log expression. Finally, log base two of one is asking to what power equals one.
Well, anything raised to the zero power gives us one, so this log expression evaluates to
zero. Notice that we can get positive negative and zero answers for our logarithm expressions.
Please pause the video and figure out what these logs evaluate to. to work out log base
10 of a million. Notice that a million is 10 to the sixth power. Now we're asking the
question, What power do we raise tend to to get a million? So that is what power do we
raise 10 to to get 10 to the six? Well, of course, the answer is going to be six. Similarly,
since point O one is 10 to the minus three, this log expression is the same thing as asking,
what's the log base 10 of 10 to the minus three? Well, what power do you have to raise
10? to to get 10 to the minus three? Of course, the answer is negative three. Log base 10
of zero is asking, What power do we raise 10 to to get zero. If you think about it,
there's no way to raise 10 to an exponent get zero. Raising 10 to a positive exponent
gets us really big positive numbers. Raising 10 to a negative exponent is like one over
10 to a power that's giving us tiny fractions, but they're still positive numbers, we're
never going to get zero. Even if we raise 10 to the zero power, we'll just get one.
So there's no way to get zero and the log base 10 of zero does not exist. If you try
it on your calculator using the log base 10 button, you'll get an error message. Same
thing happens when we do log base 10 of negative 100. We're asking 10 to what power equals
negative 100. And there's no exponent that will work. And more generally, it's possible
to take the log of numbers that are greater than zero, but not for numbers that are less
than or equal to zero. In other words, the domain of the function log base a of x, no
matter what base you're using for a, the domain is going to be all positive numbers. A few
notes on notation. When you see ln of x, that's called natural log, and it means the log base
e of x where he is that famous number that's about 2.718. When you see log of x with no
base at all, by convention, that means log base 10 of x And it's called the common log.
Most scientific calculators have buttons for natural log, and for common log. Let's practice
rewriting expressions with logs in them. log base three of one nine is negative two, can
be rewritten as the expression three to the negative two equals 1/9. Log of 13 is shorthand for log base 10 of
13. So that can be rewritten as 10 to the 1.11394 equals 13. Finally, in this last expression,
ln means natural log, or log base e, so I can rewrite this equation as log base e of
whenever E equals negative one. Well, that means the same thing as e to the negative
one equals one over e, which is true. Now let's go the opposite direction. We'll start
with exponential equations and rewrite them as logs. Remember that log base a of B equals
c means the same thing as a to the C equals b, the base stays the same in both expressions.
So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation, that's going to
be the same as the base in our log. Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument
of the log. And what goes on the other side of the equal sign. Remember that the answer
to a log is an exponent. So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for
my exponential equation. In other words, you. And I'll put the 9.78 as the argument of my
log. This works, because log base three of 9.78 equals view means the same thing as three
to the U equals 9.78, which is just what we started with. In the second example, the base
of my exponential equation is E. So the base of my log is going to be the answer to my
log is an exponent. In this case, the exponent 3x plus seven. And the other expression, the
four minus y becomes my argument of my log. Let me check, log base e of four minus y equals
3x plus seven means e to the 3x plus seven equals four minus y, which is just what I
started with. I can also rewrite log base e as natural log. This video introduced the
idea of logs, and the fact that log base a of B equal c means the same thing as a to
the C equals b. So log base a of B is asking you the question, What power exponent Do you
raise a to in order to get b. In this video, we'll work out the graph, so some log functions
and also talk about their domains. For this first example, let's graph a log function
by hand by plotting some points. The function we're working with is y equals log base two
of x, I'll make a chart of x and y values. Since we're working this out by hand, I want
to pick x values for which it's easy to compute log base two of x. So I'll start out with
the x value of one because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is 02
is another x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking, What power
do I raise to two to get to one? And the answer is one. Power other powers of two are easy
to work with. So for example, log base two of four that saying what power do I raise
to two to get four, so the answer is two. Similarly, log base two of eight is three
and log base two of 16 is four. Let me also work with some fractional values for X. If
x is one half, then log base two of one half that saying what power do I raise to two to
get one half? Well, that needs a power of negative one. It's also easy to compute by
hand, the log base two of 1/4 and 1/8. log base two of 1/4 is negative two since two
to the negative two is 1/4. And similarly, log base two of one eight is negative f3 I'll
put some tick marks on my x and y axes. Please pause the video and take a moment to plot
these points. Let's see, I have the point, one zero, that's here to one that's here,
for two, that is here, and then eight, three, which
is here. And the fractional x values, one half goes with negative one, and 1/4 with
negative two 1/8 with negative three. And if I connect the dots, I get a graph that
looks something like this. If I had smaller and smaller fractions, I would keep getting
more and more negative answers when I took log base two of them, so my graph is getting
more and more negative, my y values are getting more and more negative, as x is getting close
to zero. Now I didn't draw any parts of the graph over here with negative X values, I
didn't put any negative X values in my chart, that omission is no accident. Because if you
try to take the log base two or base anything of a negative number, like say negative four
or something, there's no answer. This doesn't exist because there's no power that you can
raise to to to get a negative number. So there are no points on the graph for negative X
values. And similarly, there are no points on the graph where x is zero, because you
can't take log base two of zero, there's no power you can raise to two to get zero. I
want to observe some key features of this graph. First of all, the domain is x values
greater than zero. In interval notation, I can write that as a round bracket because
I don't want to include zero to infinity, the range is going to be the y values, while
they go all the way down into the far reaches of the negative numbers. And the graph gradually
increases y value is getting bigger and bigger. So the range is actually all real numbers
are an interval notation negative infinity to infinity. Finally, I want to point out
that this graph has a vertical asymptote at the y axis, that is at the line x equals zero.
I'll draw that on my graph with a dotted line. A vertical asymptote is a line that our functions
graph gets closer and closer to. So this is the graph of y equals log base two of x. But
if I wanted to graph say, y equals log base 10 of x, it would look very similar, it would
still have a domain of X values greater than zero, a range of all real numbers and a vertical
asymptote at the y axis, it will still go through the point one zero, but it would go
through the point 10 one instead, because log base 10 of 10 is one, it would look pretty
much the same, just a lot flatter over here. But even though it doesn't look like it with
the way I've drawn it, it's still gradually goes up to n towards infinity. In fact, the
graph of y equals log base neaa of X for a bigger than one looks pretty much the same,
and has the same three properties. Now that we know what the basic log graph looks like,
we can plot at least rough graphs of other log functions without plotting points. Here
we have the graph of natural log of X plus five. And again, I'm just going to draw a
rough graph. If I did want to do a more accurate graph, I probably would want to plot some
points. But I know that roughly a log graph, if it was just like y equals ln of x, that
would look something like this, and it would go through the point one zero, with a vertical
asymptote along the y axis. Now if I want a graph, ln of x plus five, that just shifts
our graph by five units, it'll still have the same vertical asymptote. Since the vertical
line shifted up by five units, there's still a vertical line, but instead of going through
one zero, it'll go through the point one, five. So I'll draw a rough sketch here. Let's
compare our starting function y equals ln x and the transformed version y equals ln
x plus five in terms of the domain, the range and the vertical asymptote. Our original function
y equals ln x had a domain of zero to infinity Since adding five on the outside affects the
y values, and the domain is the x values, this transformation doesn't change the domain.
So the domain is still from zero to infinity. Now the range of our original y equals ln
x was from negative infinity to infinity. Shifting up by five does affect the y values,
and the range is talking about the y values. But since the original range was all real
numbers, if you add five to all set of all real numbers, you still get the set of all
real numbers. So in this case, the range doesn't change either. And finally, we already saw
that the original vertical asymptote of the y axis x equals zero, when we shift that up
by five units, it's still the vertical line x equals zero. In this next example, we're
starting with a log base 10 function. And since the plus two is on the inside, that
means we shift that graph left by two. So I'll draw our basic log function. Here's our
basic log function. So I'll think of that as y equals log of x going through the point
one, zero, here's its vertical asymptote. Now I need
to shift everything left by two. So my vertical asymptote shifts left, and now it's at the
line x equals negative two, instead of at x equals zero, and my graph, let's see my
point, one zero gets shifted to, let's see negative one zero, since I'm subtracting two
from the axis, and here's a rough sketch of the resulting graph. Let's compare the features
of the two graphs drawn here. We're talking about domains, the original had a domain of
from zero to infinity. But now I've shifted that left. So I've subtracted two from all
my x values. And here's my new domain, which I can also verify just by looking at the picture.
My range was originally from negative infinity to infinity, well, shifting left only affects
the x value. So it doesn't even affect the range. So my range is still negative infinity
to infinity. My vertical asymptote was originally at x equals zero. And since I subtract two
from all x values, that shifts it to x equals negative two. In this last problem, I'm not
going to worry about drawing this graph. I'll just use algebra to compute its domain. So
let's think about what's the issue, when you're taking the logs of things? Well, you can't
take the log of a negative number is zero. So whatever's inside the argument of the log
function, whatever is being fed into log had better be greater than zero. So I'll write
that down, we need to minus 3x to be greater than zero. Now it's a matter of solving an
inequality to it's got to be greater than 3x. So two thirds is greater than x. In other
words, x has to be less than two thirds. So our domain is all the x values from negative
infinity to two thirds, not including two thirds. It's a good idea to memorize the basic
shape of the graph of a log function. It looks something like this, go through the point
one zero, and has a vertical asymptote on the y axis. Also, if you remember that you
can't take the log of a negative number, or zero, then that helps you quickly compute
domains for log functions. Whatever's inside the log function, you set that greater than
zero, and solve. This video is about combining logs and exponents. Please pause the video
and take a moment to use your calculator to evaluate the following four expressions. Remember,
that log base 10 on your calculator is the log button. While log base e on your calculator
is the natural log button, you should find that the log base 10 of 10 cubed is three.
The log base e of e to the 4.2 is 4.2 10 to the log base 10 of 1000 is 1000. And eat the
log base e of 9.6 is 9.6. In each case, the log and the exponential function with the
same base undo each other and we're left with the exponent. In fact, it's true that for
any base a the log base a of a to the x is equal to x, the same sort of cancellation
happens if we do the exponential function in the log function with the same base in
the opposite order. For example, we take 10 to the power of log base 10 of 1000, the 10
to the power and the log base 10 undo each other, and we're left with the 1000s. This
happens for any base, say, a data log base a of x is equal to x. We can describe this
by saying that an exponential function and a log function with the same base undo each
other. If you're familiar with the language of inverse functions, the exponential function
and log function are inverses. Let's see why these roles hold for the first log role. log
base a of a dx is asking the question, What power do we raise a two in order to get a
to the x? In other words, a two what power is a dx? Well, the answer is clearly x. And
that's why log base a of a to the x equals x. For the second log rule, notice that the log base a of x means the
power we raise a two to get x. But this expression is saying that we're supposed to raise a to
that power. If we raise a to the power, we need to raise a two to get x, then we'll certainly
get x. Now let's use these two rules. In some examples. If we want to find three to the
log base three of 1.43 to the power and log base three undo each other, so we're left
with 1.4. If we want to find ln of e iliacs. Remember that ln means log base e. So we're
taking log base e of e to the x, well, those functions undo each other, and we're left
with x. If we want to take 10 to the log of three z, remember that log without a base
written implies that the base is 10. So really, we want to take 10 to the log base 10 of three
z will tend to a power and log base 10 undo each other. So we're left with a three z.
Finally, this last statement hold is ln of 10 to the x equal to x, well, ln means log
base e. So we're taking log base e of 10 to the x, notice that the base of the log and
the base of the exponential function are not the same. So they don't undo each other. And
in fact, log base e of 10 to the x is not usually equal to x, we can check with one
example. Say if x equals one, then log base e of 10 to the one, that's log base e of 10.
And we can check on the calculator that's equal to 2.3. And some more decimals, which
is not the same thing as one. So this statement is false, it does not hold. We need the basis
to be the same for logs and exponents to undo each other. In this video, we saw that logs
and exponents with the same base undo each other. Specifically, log base a of a to the x is equal to x and
a to the log base a of x is also equal to x for any values of x and any base a. This video
is about rules or properties of logs. The log rules are closely related to the exponent
rules. So let's start by reviewing some of the exponent rules. To keep things simple,
we'll write everything down with a base of two. Even though the exponent rules hold for
any base. We know that if we raise two to the zero power, we get one, we have a product
rule for exponents, which says that two to the M times two to the n is equal to two to
the m plus n. In other words, if we multiply two numbers, then we add the exponents. We
also have a quotient rule that says that two to the M divided by n to the n is equal to
two to the m minus n. In words, that says that if we divide two numbers, then we subtract
the exponents. Finally, we have a power rule that says if we take a power to a power, then
we multiply the exponents. Each of these exponent rules can be rewritten as a log rule. The
first rule, two to the zero equals one can be rewritten in terms of logs as log base
two of one equals zero. That's because log base two of one equals zero mean To the zero
equals one. The second rule, the product rule can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying
log of x times y equals log of x plus log of y. I'll make these base two to agree with
my base that I'm using for my exponent rules. In words, that says the log of the product
is the sum of the logs. Since logs really represent exponent, this is saying that when
you multiply two numbers together, you add their exponents, which is just what we said
for the exponent version. The quotient rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of
logs by saying the log of x divided by y is equal to the log of x minus the log of y.
In words, we can say that the log of the quotient is equal to the difference of the logs. Since
logs are really exponents, another way of saying the same thing is that when you divide
two numbers, you subtract their exponents. That's how we described the exponent rule
above. Finally, the power rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying
the log of x to the n is equal to n times log of x. Sometimes people describe this rule
by saying when you take the log of an expression with an exponent, you can bring down the exponent
and multiply. If we think of x as being some power of two, this is really saying when we
take a power to a power, we multiply their exponents. That's exactly how we described
the power rule above. It doesn't really matter if you multiply this exponent on the left
side, or on the right side. But it's more traditional to multiply it on the left side.
I've given these rules with the base of two, but they actually work for any base. To help
you remember them, please take a moment to write out the log roles using a base of a
you should get the following chart. Let's use the log rules to rewrite the following
expressions as a sum or difference of logs. In the first expression, we have a log base
10 of a quotient. So we can rewrite the log of the quotient as the difference of the logs.
Now we still have the log of a product, I can rewrite the log of a product as the sum
of the logs. So that is log of y plus log of z. When I put things together, I have to
be careful because here I'm subtracting the entire log expression. So I need to subtract
both terms of this song on the make sure I do that by putting them in parentheses. Now
I can simplify a little bit by distributing the negative sign. And here's my final answer.
In my next expression, I have the log of a product. So I can rewrite that as the sum
of two logs. I can also use my power rule to bring down
the exponent T and multiply it in the front. That gives me the final expression log of
five plus t times log of to one common mistake on this problem is to rewrite this expression
as t times log of five times two. In fact, those two expressions are not equal. Because
the T only applies to the two, not to the whole five times two, we can't just bring
it down in front using the power wall. After all, the power rule only applies to a single
expression raised to an exponent, and not to a product like this. And these next examples,
we're going to go the other direction. Here we're given sums and differences of logs.
And we want to wrap them up into a single log expression. By look at the first two pieces,
that's a difference of logs. So I know I can rewrite it as the log of a quotient. Now I
have the sum of two logs. So I can rewrite that as the log of a product. I'll clean that
up a little bit and rewrite it as log base five of a times c over B. In my second example,
I can rewrite the sum of my logs as the log of a product now, I will Like to rewrite this
difference of logs as the log of a quotient. But I can't do it yet, because of that factor
of two multiplied in front. But I can use the power rule backwards to put that two back
up in the exponent. So I'll do that first. So I will copy down the ln of x plus one times
x minus one, and rewrite this second term as ln of x squared minus one squared. Now
I have a straightforward difference of two logs, which I can rewrite as the log of a
quotient. I can actually simplify this some more. Since x plus one times x minus one is
the same thing as x squared minus one. I can cancel factors to get ln of one over x squared
minus one. In this video, we saw four rules for logs that are related to exponent rules.
First, we saw that the log with any base of one is equal to zero. Second, we saw the product
rule, the log of a product is equal to the sum of the logs. We saw the quotient rule,
the log of a quotient is the difference of the logs. And we saw the power rule. When
you take a log of an expression with an exponent in it, you can bring down the exponent and
multiply it. It's worth noticing that there's no log rule that helps you split up the log
of a psalm. In particular, the log of a psalm is not equal to the sum of the logs. If you
think about logs and exponent rules going together, this kind of makes sense, because
there's also no rule for rewriting the sum of two exponential expressions. Log rules will be super handy, as we start
to solve equations using logs. Anytime you have an equation like this one that has variables
in the exponent logs are the tool of choice for getting those variables down where you
can solve for them. In this video, I'll do a few examples of solving equations with variables
in the exponent. For our first example, let's solve for x the equation five times two to
the x plus one equals 17. As my first step, I'm going to isolate the difficult spot, the
part that has the variables and the exponent. In this example, I can do that by dividing
both sides by five. That gives me two to the x plus one equals 17 over five. Next, I'm
going to take the log of both sides, it's possible to take the log with any base, but
I prefer to take the log base 10, or the log base e for the simple reason that my calculator
has buttons for those logs. So in this example, I'll just take the log base 10. So I can omit
the base because it's a base 10 is implied here. And that gives me this expression. As
my next step, I'm going to use log roles to bring down my exponent and multiply it on
the front. It's important to use parentheses here because the entire x plus one needs to
get multiplied by log two. So that was my third step using the log roles. Now all my
variables are down from the exponent where I can work with them, but I still need to
solve for x. Right now x is trapped in the parentheses. So I'm going to free it from
the parentheses by distributing. So I get x log two plus log two equals log of 17 fifths.
Now I will try to isolate x by moving all my terms with x's in them to one side, and
all my terms without x's in them to the other side. Finally, I factor out my x. Well, it's
already kind of factored out, and I divide to isolate it. So I read out what I did. So
far I distributed. I moved all the x terms on one side, and the terms without x's on
the other side. And then I isolated the x by factoring out and dividing. We have an
exact solution for x. This is correct, but maybe not so useful if you want a decimal
answer. At this point, you can type in everything into your calculator using parentheses liberally
to get a decimal answer about 0.765. It's always a good idea to check your work by typing
in this decimal answer and seeing if the equation checks out. This next example is trickier
because there are variables in the exponent in two places with two different bases. First
step is normally to clean things up and simplify by isolating the tricky stuff. But in this
example, there's nothing really to clean up or simplifier, or no way to isolate anything
more than it already is. So we'll go ahead to the next step and take the log of both
sides. Again, I'll go ahead and use log base 10. But we couldn't use log base e instead.
Next, we can use log roles to bring down the exponents. This gives me 2x minus three in
parentheses, log two equals x minus two, log five. Now I'm going to distribute things out
to free the excess from the parentheses. That gives me 2x log two minus three log two equals
x log five minus two log five. Now I need to group the x terms on one side, and the
other terms that don't involve x on the other side. So I'll keep the 2x log two on the left,
put the minus log x log five on the left, and that gives me the minus two log five that
stays on the right and a plus three log two on the right. Finally, I need to isolate x
by factoring and dividing by factoring I just mean I factor out the x from all the terms
on the left, so that gives me x times the quantity to log two minus log five. And that
equals this mess on the right. Now I can divide the right side by the quantity on the left
side. When you type this into your calculator, I encourage you to type the whole thing in
rather than type bits and pieces in because if you round off, you'll get a less accurate
answer than if you type the whole thing in at once. In this example, when I type it in,
I get a final answer of about 5.106. In this equation, we have the variable t in
the exponent in two places. The letter E is not a variable, it represents the number e
whose decimal approximation is about 2.7. Because there's already an E and the expression,
it's going to be handy to use natural log in this problem instead of log base 10. But
before we take the log of both sides, let's clean things up. by isolating the tricky parts,
we could at least divide both sides by five. And that will give us either the negative
0.05 t is equal to three fifths it is 0.2 T. One way to proceed would now be to clean
things out further by dividing both sides by either the point two t, but I'm going to
take a different approach and go ahead and take the natural log of both sides. That gives
me ln of e to the minus 0.05 t is equal to ln of three fifths e to the 0.2 t. Now on
the left side, I can immediately use my log rule to bring down my exponent and get minus
0.05 t, L and E. But on the right side, I can't bring down the exponent yet because
this e to the point two t is multiplied by three fifths. So before I can bring down the
exponent, I need to split up this product using the product rule. So I can rewrite this
as ln of three fifths plus ln e to the 0.2 T. And now I can bring down the exponent.
So that third step was using log roles to ultimately bring down my exponents. Now ln
of E is a really nice expression, ln IV means log base e of E. So that's asking what power
do I raise E to in order to get e? And the answer is one. So anytime I have ln of E,
I can just replace that with one. That's why using natural log is a little bit handier
here than using log base 10. You can make that simplification. Next, I'm ready to solve
for t. So I don't need to distribute here. But I do need to bring my T terms to one side
of my terms without t to the other side. So let's see. I'll put my T terms on the left
and my team turns without T on the right. And finally I'm going to isolate t by factoring
and dividing. So by factoring I mean I factor out my T 
and now I can divide. Using my calculator, I can get a decimal answer of 2.04 Three,
three. This video gave some examples of solving equations with variables in the exponent.
And the key idea was to take the log of both sides and use the log properties to bring
the exponents down. This video, give some examples of equations with logs in them like
this one. In order to solve the equations like this one, we have to free the variable
from the log. And we'll do that using exponential functions. My first step in solving pretty
much any kind of equation is to simplify it and isolate the tricky part. In this case,
the tricky part is the part with the log in it. So I can isolate it by first adding three
to both sides. That gives me two ln 2x plus five equals four, and then I can divide both
sides by two. Now that I've isolated the tricky part, I still need to solve for x, but x is
trapped inside the log function. to free it, I need to somehow undo the log function. Well
log functions and exponential functions undo each other. And since this is a log base e,
I need to use the exponential function base e also. So I'm going to take e to the power
of both sides. In other words, I'll take e to the ln 2x plus five, and that's going to
equal e to the power of two. Now e to the ln of anything, I'll just write
a for anything. That means e to the log base e of a, that you the power and log base e
undo each other. So we just get a, I'm going to use that principle over here, e to the
ln of 2x plus five, the E and the log base e undo each other. And we're left with 2x
plus five on the left side. So 2x plus five is equal to E squared. And from there, it's
easy to finish the problem and solve for x by subtracting five from both sides and then
dividing by two. So I'll just write the third step here is to just say finish solving for
x. There's one last step we need to do when solving equations with logs in them. And that's
to check our answers. Because we may get extraneous solutions. an extraneous solution is a solution
that comes out of the solving process, but doesn't actually satisfy the original equation.
And those can happen for equations with logs in them, because we might get a solution that
makes the argument of the log negative or zero, and we can't take the log of a negative
numbers zero. So let's check and plug in the solution of E squared minus five over two.
We'll plug that in for x in our original equation and see if that works. So let's see the twos
cancel here. So I get two ln e squared minus five plus five, minus three, I want that to
equal one. And now my fives cancel. And so I have two ln e squared minus three that I
want to equal one. Well, I think this is going to work out because let's see, ln is log base
e. and log base e of E squared that's asking the question, What power do I raise e two
to get e squared? Well, I have to raise it to the power of two to get e squared. So this
becomes two times two minus three. And does that equal one, four minus three does equal
one. So that all checks out. And we didn't have any problem with taking the log of negative
numbers zero, we didn't get any extraneous solutions. So this is our solution. The second
equation is a little bit trickier, because there's a log into places. Now notice that
this is a log where there's no base written. So a base 10 is implied. So I'm already thinking
in order to undo a log base 10, I'm going to want to take a 10 to the power of both
sides. Of course, it's still a good idea to isolate the tricky part, but there's nothing
really to isolate here. So I'm going to say, can't do it here. So we'll just jump right
to straight step two, and take 10 to the power of both sides. Okay, so that's going to give
me 10 to the whole thing, log x plus three plus log x, that whole thing is in the exponent
equals 10 to the One Power. Well, I know what to do with the right side 10 to the one is
just 10. But what do I do with the 10 to these two things added up Up, while remembering my exponent rules, I know
that when you add up the exponent, that's what happens when you multiply two things.
So this is the same thing as 10 to the log x plus three times 10 to the log x, right,
because when you multiply two things, you add the exponent, so these are the same. Okay,
now we're in business, because 10 to the log base 10, those undo each other. And so this
whole expression here simplifies to x plus three. Similarly, 10 to the log base, 10 of
x is just x. So I'm multiplying x plus three by x, that's equal to 10. Now I have an equation
I can deal with, it's a quadratic, so I'm going to first multiply out to make it look
more like a quadratic, get everything to one side. So is equal to zero. And, and now I
can either factor or use the quadratic formula. I think this one factors, it looks like X
plus five times x minus two, so I'm going to get x is negative five, or x is two. So
that was all the third step to finish solving for x. Finally, we need to check our solutions
to make sure we haven't gotten some extraneous ones. So let's see if x equals negative five.
If I plug that into my original equation, that says, I'm checking that log of negative
five plus three, plus log of negative five, checking that's equal to one. Well, this is
giving me a queasy feeling. And I hope it's giving you a queasy feeling too, because log
of negative two does not exist, right, you can't take the log of a negative number. Same
thing with log of negative five. So x equals negative five is an extraneous solution, it
doesn't actually solve our original equation. Let's check the other solution, x equals two.
So now we're checking to see if log of two plus three plus log of two is equal to one.
Since there's no problem with taking logs of negative numbers, or zero here, this should
work out fine. And just to finish checking, we can see let's see this is log of five plus
log of two, we want that equal one. But using my log rules, the sum of two logs is the log
of the product. So log of five times two, we want that to equal one. And that's just
log base 10 of 10. And that definitely equals one because log base 10 of 10 says, What power
do I raise tend to to get 10. And that power is one. So the second solution x equals two
does check out. And that's our final answer. Before I leave this problem, I do want to
mention that some people have an alternative approach. Some people like to start with the
original equation, and then use log roles to combine everything into one log expression.
So since we have the sum of two logs, we know that's the same as the log of a product, right,
so we can rewrite the left side as log of x plus three times x, that equals one, then
we do the same trick of taking 10 to the power of both sides. And as before, the 10 to the
power and the log base 10 undo each other, and we get x plus three times x equals 10,
just like we did before. In the first solution, we ended up using exponent rules to rewrite
things. In the second alternative method, we use log rules to rewrite things. So the
methods are really pretty similar, pretty equivalent, and they certainly will get us
to the same answer. So we've seen a couple examples of equations with logs in them and
how to solve them. And the key step is to use exponential functions to undo the log.
In other words, take e to the power of both sides to undo natural log, and take 10 to
the power of both sides. To undo log base 10. In this video, we'll use exponential equations
in some real life applications, like population growth and radioactive decay. I'll also introduce
the ideas of half life and doubling time. In this first example, let's suppose we invest
$1,600 in a bank account that earns 6.5% annual interest compounded once a year. How many
years will it take until the account has $2,000 in it if you don't make any further deposits
or withdrawals since our money is earning six point 5% interest each year, that means
that every year the money gets multiplied by 1.065. So after t years, my 1600 gets multiplied
by 1.065 to the t power. I'll write this in function notation as f of t equals 1600 times
1.065 to the T, where f of t is the amount of money after t years. Now we're trying to
figure out how long it will take to get $2,000 $2,000 is a amount of money. So that's an
amount for f of t. And we're trying to solve for T the amount of time. So let me write
out my equation and make a note that I'm solving for t. Now to solve for t, I want to first
isolate the tricky part. So I'm going to the tricky part is the part with the exponential
in it. So I'm going to divide both sides by 1600. That gives me 2000 over 1600 equals
1.065. To the tee, I can simplify this a little bit further as five fourths. Now that I've
isolated the tricky part, my next step is going to be to take the log of both sides.
That's because I have a variable in the exponent. And I know that if I log take the log of both
sides, I can use log roles to bring that exponent down where I can solve for it. I think I'll
use log base e this time. So I have ln fi force equals ln of 1.065 to the T. Now by
the power rule for logs, on the right side, I can bring that exponent t down and multiply
it in the front. Now it's easy to isolate t just by dividing both sides by ln of 1.065.
Typing that into my calculator, I get that t is approximately 3.54 years. And the next
example, we have a population of bacteria that initially contains 1.5 million bacteria,
and it's growing by 12% per day, we want to find the doubling time, the doubling time
means the amount of time it takes for a quantity to double in size. For example, the amount
of time it takes to get from the initial 1.5 million bacteria to 3 million bacteria would
be the doubling time. Let's start by writing an equation for the amount of bacteria. So
if say, P of t represents the number of bacteria in millions, then my equation and T represents
time in days, then P of t is going to be given by the initial amount of bacteria times the
growth factor 1.12 to the T. That's because my population of bacteria is growing by 12%
per day. That means the number of bacteria gets multiplied by one point 12. Since we're
looking for the doubling time, we're looking for the t value when P of D will be twice
as big. So I can set P of t to be three and solve for t. As before, I'll start by isolating
the tricky part, taking the log  bringing the T down. And finally solving for
T. Let's see three over 1.5 is two so I can write this as ln two over ln 1.12. Using my
calculator, that's about 6.12 days. It's an interesting fact that doubling time only depends
on the growth rate, that 12% growth, not the initial population. In fact, I could have
figured out the doubling time without even knowing how many bacteria were in my initial
population. Let me show you how that would work. If I didn't know how many I started
with, I could still write P of t equals a times 1.12 to the t where a is our initial
population that I don't know what it is. Then if I want to figure out how long it takes
for my population, to double Well, if I start with a and double that I get to a. So I'll
set my population equal to two a. And I'll solve for t. Notice that my A's cancel. And
so when I take the log of both sides and bring the T down and solve for t, I get the exact
same thing as before, it didn't matter what the initial population was, I didn't even
have to know what it was. In this next example, we're told the initial population, and we're
told the doubling time, we're not told by what percent the population increases each
minute, or by what number, we're forced to multiply the population by each minute. So
we're gonna have to solve for that, I do know that I want to use an equation of the form
y equals a times b to the T, where T is going to be the number of minutes, and y is going
to be the number of bacteria. And I know that my initial amount a is 350. So I can really
write y equals 350 times b to the T. Now the doubling time tells me that when 15 minutes
have elapsed, my population is going to be twice as big, or 700. plugging that into my
equation, I have 700 equals 350 times b to the 15. Now I need to solve for b. Let me
clean this up a little bit by dividing both sides by 350. That gives me 700 over 350 equals
b to the 15th. In other words, two equals b to the 15th. To solve for B, I don't have
to actually use logs here, because my variables in the base not in the exponent, so I don't
need to bring that exponent down. Instead, the easiest way to solve this is just by taking
the 15th root of both sides or equivalently. The 1/15 power. That's because if I take B
to the 15th to the 1/15, I multiply by exponents, that gives me B to the one is equal to two
to the 1/15. In other words, B is two to the 1/15, which as a decimal is approximately
1.047294. I like to use a lot of decimals if I'm doing a decimal approximation and these
kind of problems to increase accuracy. But of course, the most accurate thing is just
to leave B as it is. And I'll do that and rewrite my equation is y equals 350 times
two to the 1/15 to the T. Now I'd like to work this problem one more time. And this
time, I'm going to use the form of the equation y equals a times e to the RT. This is called
a continuous growth model. It looks different, but it's actually an equivalent form to this
growth model over here. And I'll say more about why these two forms are equivalent at
the end, I can use the same general ideas to solve in this form. So I know that my initial
amount is 350. And I know again that when t is 15, my Y is 700. So I plug in 700 here
350 e to the r times 15. And I solve for r. Again, I'm going to simplify things by dividing
both sides by 350. That gives me two equals e to the r times 15. This time my variable
does end up being in the exponent. So I do want to take the log of both sides, I'm going
to use natural log, because I already have an E and my problem. So natural log and E
are kind of more harmonious the other than then common log with base 10 and E. So I take
the log of both sides. Now I can pull the exponent down. So that's our times 15 times
ln of E. Well Elena V is just one, right? Because Elena V is asking what power do I
raise E to to get e that's just one. And so I get 15 r equals ln two. So r is equal to
ln two divided by 15. Let me plug that back in to my original equation as e to the ln
two over 15 times t. Now I claimed that these two equations were actually the same thing
just looking different. And the way to see that is if I start with this equation, and
I rewrite as e to the ln two over 15 like that to the tee. Well, I claim that this quantity
right here is the same thing as my two to the 1/15. And in fact One way to see that
is e to the ln two already to the 115. The Right, that's the same, because every time
I take a power to a power, I multiply exponents. But what's Ed Oh, and two, E and ln undo each
other, so that's just 350 times two to the 1/15 to the T TA, the equations are really
the same. And these, you'll always be able to find two different versions of an exponential
equation, sort of the standard one, a times b to the T, or the continuous growth one,
a times e to the RT. In this last example, we're going to work with half life, half life
is pretty much like doubling time, it just means the amount of time that it takes for
a quantity to decrease to half as much as we originally started with, we're told that
the half life of radioactive carbon 14 is 5750 years. So that means it takes that long
for a quantity of radioactive carbon 14 to decay, so that you just have half as much
left and the rest is nonradioactive form. So we're told a sample of bone that originally
contained 200 grams of radioactive carbon 14 now contains only 40 grams, we're supposed
to find out how old the sample is, is called carbon dating. Let's use the continuous growth
model this time. So our final amount, so this is our amount of radioactive c 14 is going
to be the initial amount  times e to the RT, we could have used the
other model to we could have used f of t equals a times b to the T, but I just want to use
the continuous model for practice. So we know that our half life is 5750. So what that means
is when t is 5750, our amount is going to be one half of what we started with. Let me
see if I can plug that into my equation and figure out use that to figure out what r is.
That's ours called the continuous growth rate. So I plug in one half a for the final amount,
a is still the initial amount, e to the r and I have 5750 I can cancel my A's. And now
I want to solve for r, r is in my exponent. So I do need to take the log of both sides
to solve for it. I'm going to use log base e since I already have an E and my problem,
log base e is more compatible with E then log base 10 is okay. Now, on the left side,
I still have log of one half and natural log of one half on the right side, ln n e to a
power those undo each other. So I'm left with R times 5750. Now I can solve for r, it's
ln one half over 5750 could work that as a decimal, but it's actually more accurate just
to keep it in exact form. So now I can rewrite my equation, I have f of t equals a times
e to the ln one half over five 750 t. Now I can use that to figure out my problem. And
my problem the bone originally contained 200 grams, that's my a, I want to figure out when
it's going to contain only 40 grams, that's my final amount. And so I need to solve for
t. I'll clean things up by dividing both sides by 200. Let's say 40 over 200 is 1/5. Now
I'm going to take the ln of both sides. And ln and e to the power undo each other. So
I'm left with Elena 1/5 equals ln of one half divided by five 750 T. And finally I can solve
for t but super messy but careful use of my calculator gives me an answer of 13,351 years
approximately. That kind of makes sense in terms of the half
life because to get from 200 to 40 you have to decrease by half a little more than two
times right or increasing by half once would get you to 100 decreasing to half again would
get you to 50 a little more than 40 and two half lives is getting pretty close to 13,000
years. This video introduced a lot of new things it introduced continue Less growth
model, which is another equivalent way of writing an exponential function. The relationship
is that the B in this example, is the same thing as EDR. In that version, it also introduced
the ideas of doubling time. And HalfLife the amount of time it takes a quantity to double
or decreased to half in an exponential growth model. Recall that a linear equation is equation
like for example, 2x minus y equals one. It's an equation without any x squared or y squared
in it, something that could be rewritten in the form y equals mx plus b, the equation
for a line a system of linear equations is a collection of two or more linear equations.
For example, I could have these two equations. A solution to a system of equations is that
an x value and a y value that satisfy both of the equations. For example, the ordered
pair two three, that means x equals two, y equals three is a solution to this system.
Because if I plug in x equals two, and y equals three into the first equation, it checks out
since two times two minus three is equal to one. And if I plug in x equals two and y equals
three into the second equation, it also checks out two plus three equals five. However, the
ordered pair one for that is x equals one, y equals four is not a solution to the system.
Even though this X and Y value work in the second equation, since one plus four does
equal five, it doesn't work in the first equation, because two times one minus four is not equal
to one. In this video, we'll use systematic methods to find the solutions to systems of
linear equations. In this first example, we want to solve this system of equations, there
are two main methods we could use, we could use the method of substitution, or we could
use the method of elimination. If we use the method of substitution, the main idea is to
isolate one variable in one equation, and then substitute it in to the other equation.
For example, we can start with the first equation 3x minus two y equals four, and isolate the
x by adding two y to both sides, and then dividing both sides by three. Think I'll rewrite
that a little bit by breaking up the fraction into two fractions four thirds plus two thirds
y. Now, I'm going to copy down the second equation 5x plus six y equals two. And I'm
going to substitute in my expression for x. That gives me five times four thirds plus
two thirds y plus six y equals two. And now I've got an equation with only one variable
in it y. So I can solve for y as a number. First, I'm going to distribute the five so
that gives me 20 thirds plus 10 thirds y plus six y equals two. And now I'm going to keep
all my y terms, my terms with y's in them on the left side, but I'll move all my terms
without y's in them to the right side. At this point, I could just add up all my fractions
and solve for y. But since I don't really like working with fractions, I think I'll
do the trick of clearing the denominators here. So I'm going to actually multiply both
sides by my common denominator of three just to get rid of the denominators and not have
to work with fractions. So let me write that down. Distributing the three, I get 10 y plus
eight t and y equals six minus 20. Now add things together. So that's 28 y equals negative
14. So that means that y is going to be negative 14 over 28, which is negative one half. So I've solved for y. And now I can go back
and plug y into either of my equations to solve for x, I plug it into my first equation.
So I'm plugging in negative one half for y. That gives me 3x plus one equals four. So
3x equals three, which means that x is equal to one. I've solved my system of equations
and gotten x equals one On y equals minus one half, I can also write that as an ordered
pair, one, negative one half for my solution. Now let's go back and solve the same system,
but use a different method, the method of elimination, the key idea to the method of
elimination is to multiply each equation by a constant to make the coefficients of one
variable match. Let me start by copying down my two equations. Say I'm trying to make the
coefficient of x match. One way to do that is to multiply the first equation by five,
and the second equation by three. That way, the coefficient of x will be 15 for both equations,
so let me do that. So for the first equation, I'm going to multiply both sides by five.
And for the second equation, I'm going to multiply both sides by three. That gives me
for the first equation 15x minus 10, y equals 20. And for the second equation, 15x plus
18, y is equal to six. Notice that the equate the coefficients of x match. So if I subtract
the second equation from the first, the x term will completely go away, it'll be zero
times x, and I'll be left with let's see negative 10 y minus 18, y is going to give me minus
28 y. And if I do 20 minus six, that's going to give me 14. solving for y, I get y is 14
over minus 28, which is minus one half just like before. Now we can continue, like we
did in the previous solution, and substitute that value of y into either one of the equations.
I'll put it again in here. And my solution proceeds as before. So once again, I get the
solution that x equals one and y equals minus one half. Before we go on to the next problem,
let me show you graphically what this means. Here I've graphed the equations 3x minus two,
y equals four, and 5x plus six y equals two. And we can see that these two lines intersect
in the point with coordinates one negative one half, just like we predicted by solving
equations algebraically. Let's take a look at another system of equations. I'm going
to rewrite the first equation, so the x term is on the left side with the y term, and the
constant term stays on the right. And I'll rewrite or copy down the second equation.
Since the coefficient of x in the first equation is minus four, and the second equation is
three, I'm going to try using the method of elimination and multiply the first equation
by three and the second equation by four. That'll give me a coefficient of x of negative
12. And the first equation, and 12. And the second equation, those are equal and opposite,
right, so I'll be able to add together my equations to cancel out access. So let's do
that. My first equation becomes negative 12x plus 24, y equals three, and I'll put everything
by three. And my second equation, I'll multiply everything by four. So that's 12x minus 24,
y equals eight. Now something kind of funny has happened here, not only do the x coefficients
match has in with opposite signs, but the Y coefficients do also. So if I add together
my two equations, in order to cancel out the x term, I'm also going to cancel out the y
term, and I'll just get zero plus zero is equal to three plus eight is 11. Well, that's
a contradiction, we can't have zero equal to 11. And that shows that these two equations
actually have no solution. Let's look at this situation graphically.
If we graph our two equations, we see that they're parallel lines with the same slope.
This might be more clear, if I isolate y in each equation, the first equation, I get y
equals, let's see, dividing by eight that's the same thing as four eighths or one half
x plus one eight. And the second equation, if I isolate y, let's say minus six y equals
minus 3x plus two divided by minus six, that's y equals one half x minus 1/3. So indeed,
they have the same slope. And so they're parallel with different In intercepts, and so they
can have no intersection. And so it makes sense that we have no solution to our system
of linear equations. This kind of system that has no solution is called an inconsistent
system. In this third example, yet a third behavior happens. This time, I think I'm going
to solve by substitution because I already have X with a coefficient of one. So it's
really easy to just isolate X in the first equation, and then plug in to the second equation
to get three times six minus five y plus 15, y equals 18. If I distribute out, I get the
strange phenomenon that the 15 y's cancel and I just get 18 equals 18, which is always
true. This is what's called a dependent system of linear equations. If you look more closely,
you can see that the second equation is really just a constant multiple, the first equation
is just three times every term is three times as big as the corresponding term and the first
equation. So there's no new information in the second equation, anything, any x and y
values that satisfy the first one will satisfy the second one. So this system of equations
has infinitely many solutions. Any ordered pair x y, where X plus five y equals six,
or in other words, X's minus five y plus six will satisfy this system of equations. That
would include a y value of zero corresponding x value of six or a y value of one corresponding
to an x value of one, or a y value of 1/3. Corresponding to an x value of 13 thirds just
by plugging into this equation will work. Graphically, if I graph both of these equations,
the lines will just be on top of each other, so I'll just see one line. In this video,
we've solved systems of linear equations, using the method of substitution and the method
of elimination. We've seen that systems of linear equations can have one solution. When
the lines that the equations represent intersect in one point, they can be inconsistent, and
have no solutions that corresponds to parallel lines, or they can be dependent and have infinitely
many solutions that corresponds to the lines lying on top of each other. In this video,
I'll work through a problem involving distance rate and time. The key relationship to keep
in mind is that the rate of travel is the distance traveled divided by the time it takes
to travel again. For example, if you're driving 60 miles an hour, that's your rate. And that's
because you're going a distance of 60 miles in one hour. Sometimes it's handy to rewrite
that relationship by multiplying both sides by T time. And that gives us that R times
T is equal to D. In other words, distance is equal to rate times time. There's one more
important principle to keep in mind. And that's the idea that rates add. For example, if you
normally walk at three miles per hour, but you're walking on a moving sidewalk, that's
going at a rate of two miles per hour, then your total speed of travel with respect to
you know something stationary is going to be three plus two, or five miles per hour.
All right, that is a formula as our one or the first rate per second rate is equal to
the total rate. Let's use those two key ideas. distance equals rate times time, and rates
add in the following problem. else's boat has a top speed of six miles per hour and
still water. While traveling on a river at top speed. She went 10 miles upstream in the
same amount of time she went 30 miles downstream, we're supposed to find the rate of the river
currents. I'm going to organize the information in this problem into a chart. During the course of Elsa stay, there were
two situations we need to keep in mind. For one period of time she was going upstream.
And for another period of time she was going downstream. For each of those, I'm going to
chart out the distance you traveled. The rate she went at and the time it took when she
was going upstream. She went a total distance of 10 miles. When she was going downstream
she went a longer distance of 30 miles. But the times to travel those two distances were
the same. Since I don't know what that time was, I'll just give it a variable I'll call
it T now Think about her rate of travel, the rate she traveled upstream was slower because
she was going against the current and faster when she was going downstream with the current.
We don't know what the speed of the current is, that's what we're trying to figure out.
So maybe I'll give it a variable R. But we do know that in still water also can go six
miles per hour. And when she's going downstream, since she's going with the direction of the
current rates should add, and her rate downstream should be six plus R, that's her rate, and
still water plus the rate of the current. On the other hand, when she's going upstream,
then she's going against the current, so her rate of six miles per hour, we need to subtract
the rate of the current from that. Now that we've charted out our information, we can
turn it into equations using the fact that distance equals rate times time, we actually
have two equations 10 equals six minus R times T, and 30 is equal to six plus R times T.
Now that we've converted our situation into a system of equations, our next job is to
solve the system of equations. In this example, I think the easiest way to proceed is to isolate
t in each of the two equations. So in the first equation, I'll divide both sides by
six minus r, and a second equation R divided by six plus R. That gives me 10 over six minus
r equals T, and 30 over six plus r equals t. Now if I set my T variables equal to each
other, I get, I get 10 over six minus r is equal to 30 over six plus R. I'm making progress
because now I have a single equation, the single variable that I need to solve. Since
the variable R is trapped in the denominator, I'm going to proceed by clearing the denominator.
So I'm going to multiply both sides by the least common denominator, that is six minus
r times six plus R. Once I cancel things out, I get that the six plus r times 10 is equal
to 30 times six minus r, if I distribute, I'm going to get 60 plus xR equals 180 minus
30 ar, which I can now solve, let's see, that's going to be 40 r is equal to 120. So our,
the speed of my current is going to be three miles per hour. This is all that the problem
asked for the speed of the current. If I also wanted to solve for the other unknown time,
I could do so by plugging in R into one of my equations and solving for T. In this video,
I saw the distance rate and time problem by charting out my information for the two situations
and my problem using the fact that rates add to fill in some of my boxes, and then using
the formula distance equals rate times time to build a system of equations. In this video,
I'll do a standard mixture problem in which we have to figure out what quantity of two
solutions to mix together. household bleach contains 6% sodium hypochlorite. The other
94% is water. How much household bleach should be combined with 70 liters of a weaker 1%
hypochlorite solution in order to form a solution, that's 2.5% sodium hypochlorite. I want to
turn this problem into a system of equations. So I'm asking myself what quantities are going
to be equal to each other? Well, the total amount of sodium hypochlorite that has symbol
and a co o before mixing, it should equal the total amount of sodium
hypochlorite after mixing. Also, the total amount of water before mixing should equal
the total amount of water after. And finally, there's just the total amount of solution.
In my two jugs, sodium hypochlorite together with water should equal the total amount of
solution after that gives me a hint for what I'm looking for. But before I start reading
out equations, I find it very helpful to chart out my quantities. So I've got the 6% solution.
The household leech, I've got the 1% solution. And I've got my Desired Ending 2.5% solution.
Now on each of those solutions, I've got a certain volume of sodium hypochlorite. I've
also got a volume of water. And I've got a total volume of solution. Let me see which
of these boxes I can actually fill in, I know that I'm adding 70 liters of the 1% solution.
So I can put a 70 in the total volume of solution here. I don't know what volume of the household
bleach, I want to add, that's what I'm trying to find out. So I'm going to just call that
volume x. Now since my 2.5% solution is made by combining my other two solutions, I know
its volume is going to be the sum of these two volumes, so I'll write 70 plus x in this
box. Now, the 6% solution means that whatever the volume of solution is, 6% of that is the
sodium hypochlorite. So the volume of the sodium hypochlorite is going to be 0.06 times
x, the volume of water and that solution is whatever's left, so that's going to be x minus
0.06x, or point nine four times X with the following the same reasoning for the 1% solution
1% of the 70 liters is a sodium hypochlorite. So that's going to be 0.01 times 70. Or point
seven, the volume of water and that solution is going to be 99% or point nine, nine times
seven day. That works out to 69.3. Finally, for the 2.5% solution, the volume of the sodium
hypochlorite is going to be 0.0 to five times the volume of solution 70 plus x and the volume
of water is going to be the remainder. So that's 0.975 times 70 plus x. Now I've already
used the fact that the volume of solutions before added up is the volume of solution
after in writing a 70 plus x in this box. But I haven't yet used the fact that the volume
of the sodium hypochlorite is preserved before and after. So I can write that down as an
equation. So that means 0.06x plus 0.7 is equal to 0.025 times 70 plus x. Now I've got
an equation with a variable. I'll try to solve it. Since I don't like all these decimals,
I'm going to multiply both sides of my equation by let's see, 1000 should get rid of all the
decimals. After distributing, I get 60x plus 700 equals 25 times 70 plus x. Distributing
some more, I get 60x plus 700 is equal to 1750 plus 25x. So let's see 60 minus 25 is
35x is equal to 1050. Which gives me that x equals 30 liters of the household bleach. Notice that I never actually had to use the
fact that the water quantity of water before mixing is equal to the quantity of water after
that is I never use the information in this column. In fact, that information is redundant.
Once I know that the quantities of sodium hypochlorite add up, and the total volume
of solutions add up. The fact that that volume of waters add up is just redundant information.
The techniques to use to solve this equation involving solutions can be used to solve many
many other equations involving mixtures of items. My favorite method is to first make
a chart involving the types of mixtures and the types of items in your mixture. Fill in
as many boxes size I can and then use the fact that the quantities add. This video is
about rational functions and their graphs. Recall that a rational function is a function
that can be written as a ratio or quotient of two power. No Here's an example. The simpler
function, f of x equals one over x is also considered a rational function, you can think
of one and x as very simple polynomials. The graph of this rational function is shown here.
This graph looks different from the graph of a polynomial. For one thing, its end behavior
is different. The end behavior of a function is the way the graph looks when x goes through
really large positive, or really large negative numbers, we've seen that the end behavior
of a polynomial always looks like one of these cases. That is why marches off to infinity
or maybe negative infinity, as x gets really big or really negative. But this rational
function has a different type of end behavior. Notice, as x gets really big, the y values
are leveling off at about a y value of three. And similarly,
as x values get really negative, our graph is leveling off near the line y equals three,
I'll draw that line, y equals three on my graph, that line is called a horizontal asymptote.
A horizontal asymptote is a horizontal line that our graph gets closer and closer to as
x goes to infinity, or as X goes to negative infinity, or both. There's something else
that's different about this graph from a polynomial graph, look at what happens as x gets close
to negative five. As we approach negative five with x values on the right, our Y values
are going down towards negative infinity. And as we approach the x value of negative
five from the left, our Y values are going up towards positive infinity. We say that
this graph has a vertical asymptote at x equals negative five. A vertical asymptote is a vertical
line that the graph gets closer and closer to. Finally, there's something really weird
going on at x equals two, there's a little open circle there, like the value at x equals
two is dug out. That's called a hole. A hole is a place along the curve of the graph where
the function doesn't exist. Now that we've identified some of the features of our rational
functions graph, I want to look back at the equation and see
how we could have predicted those features just by looking at the equation. To find horizontal
asymptotes, we need to look at what our function is doing when x goes through really big positive
or really big negative numbers. Looking at our equation for our function, the numerator
is going to be dominated by the 3x squared term when x is really big, right, because
three times x squared is going to be absolutely enormous compared to this negative 12. If
x is a big positive or negative number, in the denominator, the denominator will be dominated
by the x squared term. Again, if x is a really big positive or negative number, like a million,
a million squared will be much, much bigger than three times a million or negative 10.
For that reason, to find the end behavior, or the horizontal asymptote, for our function,
we just need to look at the term on the numerator and the term on the denominator that have
the highest exponent, those are the ones that dominate the expression in size. So as x gets
really big, our functions y values are going to be approximately 3x squared over x squared,
which is three. That's why we have a horizontal asymptote at y equals three. Now our vertical
asymptotes, those tend to occur where our denominator of our function is zero. That's
because the function doesn't exist when our denominator is zero. And when we get close
to that place where our denominator is zero, we're going to be dividing by tiny, tiny numbers,
which will make our Y values really big in magnitude. So to check where our denominators
zero, let's factor our function. In fact, I'm going to go ahead and factor the numerator
and the denominator. So the numerator factors, let's see, pull out the three, I get x squared
minus four, factor in the denominator, that factors into X plus five times x minus two,
I can factor a little the numerator a little further, that's three times x minus two times
x plus two over x plus 5x minus two. Now, when x is equal to negative five, my denominator
will be zero, but my numerator will not be zero. That's what gives me the vertical asymptote
at x equals negative five. Notice that when x equals two, the denominator is zero, but
the numerator is also zero. In fact, if I cancelled the x minus two factor from the
numerator, and in nominator, I get a simplified form for my function that agrees with my original
function as long as x is not equal to two. That's because when x equals two, the simplified
function exists, but the original function does not, it's zero over zero, it's undefined.
But for every other x value, including x values near x equals to our original functions just
the same as this function. And that's why our function only has a vertical asymptote
at x equals negative five, not one at x equals two, because the x minus two factor is no
longer in the function after simplifying, it does have a hole at x equals two, because
the original function is not defined there, even though the simplified version is if we
want to find the y value of our hole, we can just plug in x equals two into our simplified
version of our function, that gives a y value of three times two plus two over two plus
seven, or 12 ninths, which simplifies to four thirds. So our whole is that to four thirds.
Now that we've been through one example in detail, let's summarize our findings. We find
the vertical asymptotes and the holes by looking where the denominator is zero. The holes happen
where the denominator and numerator are both zero and those factors cancel out. The vertical
asymptotes are all other x values where the denominator is zero, we find the horizontal
asymptotes. By considering the highest power term on the numerator and the denominator,
I'll explain this process in more detail in three examples. In the first example, if we
circle the highest power terms, that simplifies to 5x over 3x squared, which is five over
3x. As x gets really big, the denominator is going to be huge. So I'm going to be dividing
five by a huge, huge number, that's going to be going very close to zero. And therefore
we have a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero. In the second example, the
highest power terms, 2x cubed, over 3x cubed simplifies to two thirds. So as x gets really
big, we're going to be heading towards two thirds, and we have a horizontal asymptote
at y equals two thirds. In the third example, the highest power terms, x squared over 2x
simplifies to x over two. As x gets really big, x over two is getting really big. And
therefore, we don't have a horizontal asymptote at all. This is going to infinity, when x
gets through go through big positive numbers, and is going to negative infinity when x goes
through a big negative numbers. So in this case, the end behavior is kind of like that
of a polynomial, and there's no horizontal asymptote. In general, when the degree of
the numerator is smaller than the degree of the denominator, we're in this first case
where the denominator gets really big compared to the numerator and we go to zero. In the
second case, where the degree of the numerator and the degree of the dominant are equal,
things cancel out, and so we get a horizontal asymptote at the y value, that's equal to
the ratio of the leading coefficients. Finally, in the third case, when the degree of the
numerator is bigger than the degree of the denominator, then the numerator is getting
really big compared to the denominator, so we end up with no horizontal asymptote. Final
Finally, let's apply all these observations to one more example. Please pause the video
and take a moment to find the vertical asymptotes, horizontal asymptotes and holes for this rational
function. To find the vertical asymptotes and holes, we need to look at where the denominator
is zero. In fact, it's going to be handy to factor both the numerator and the denominator.
Since there if there are any common factors, we might have a whole instead of a vertical
asymptote. The numerator is pretty easy to factor. Let's see that's 3x times x plus one
for the denominator or first factor out an x. And then I'll factor some more using a
guess and check method. I know that I'll need a 2x and an X to multiply together to the
2x squared and I'll need a three and a minus one or alpha minus three and a one. Let's
see if that works. If I multiply out 2x minus one times x plus three that does get me back
to x squared plus 5x minus three, so that checks out. Now I noticed that I have a common
factor of x in both the numerator and the denominator. So that's telling me I'm going
to have a hole at x equals zero. In fact, I could rewrite my rational function by cancelling
out that common factor. And that's equivalent, as long as x is not equal to zero. So the
y value of my whole is what I get when I plug zero into my simplified version, that would
be three times zero plus one over two times zero minus one times zero plus three, which
is three over negative three or minus one. So my whole is at zero minus one. Now all
the remaining places in my denominator that make my denominator zero will get me vertical
asymptotes. So I'll have a vertical asymptote, when 2x minus one times x plus three equals
zero, that is, when 2x minus one is zero, or x plus three is zero. In other words, when
x is one half, or x equals negative three. Finally, to find my horizontal asymptotes,
I just need to consider the highest power term in the numerator and the denominator.
That simplifies to three over 2x, which is bottom heavy, right? When x gets really big,
this expression is going to zero. And that means that we have a horizontal asymptote
at y equals zero. So we found the major features of our graph, the whole, the vertical asymptotes
and the horizontal asymptotes. Together, this would give us a framework for what the graph
of our function looks like. horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, vertical asymptotes at x
equals one half, and x equals minus three at a hole at the point zero minus one. plotting
a few more points, or using a graphing calculator of graphing program, we can see that our actual
function will look something like this. Notice that the x intercept when x is negative
one, corresponds to where the numerator of our rational function or reduced rational
function is equal to zero. That's because a zero on the numerator that doesn't make
the denominator zero makes the whole function zero. And an X intercept is where the y value
of the whole function is zero. In this video, we learned how to find horizontal asymptotes
have rational functions. By looking at the highest power terms, we learned to find the
vertical asymptotes and holes. By looking at the factored version of the functions.
The holes correspond to the x values that make the numerator and denominator zero, his
corresponding factors cancel. The vertical asymptotes correspond to the x values that
make the denominator zero, even after factoring any any common and in common factors in the
numerator denominator. This video is about combining functions by
adding them subtracting them multiplying and dividing them. Suppose we have two functions,
f of x equals x plus one and g of x equals x squared. One way to combine them is by adding
them together. This notation, f plus g of x means the function defined by taking f of
x and adding it to g of x. So for our functions, that means we take x plus one and add x squared,
I can rearrange that as the function x squared plus x plus one. So f plus g evaluated on
x means x squared plus x plus one. And if I wanted to evaluate f plus g, on the number
two, that would be two squared plus two plus one, or seven. Similarly, the notation f minus
g of x means the function we get by taking f of x and subtracting g of x. So that would
be x plus one minus x squared. And if I wanted to take f minus g evaluated at one, that would
be one plus one minus one squared, or one, the notation F dot g of x, which is sometimes
also written just as f g of x. That means we take f of x times g of x. In other words,
x plus one times x squared, which could be simplified as x cubed plus x squared. The
notation f divided by g of x means I take f of x and divided by g of x. So that would
be x plus one divided by x squared. In this figure, the blue graph represents h of x.
And the red graph represents the function p of x, we're asked to find h minus p of zero. We don't have any equations to work with,
but that's okay. We know that for any x, h minus p of x is defined as h of x minus p
of x. So for x equals zero, H minus p of zero is going to be h of zero minus p of zero.
Using the graph, we can find h of zero by finding the value of zero on the x axis, and
finding the corresponding y value for the function h of x. So that's about 1.8. Now
P of zero, we can find similarly by looking for zero on the x axis, and finding the corresponding
y value for the function p of x, and that's a y value of one 1.8 minus one is 0.8. So
that's our approximate value for H minus p of zero. If we want to find P times h of negative
three, again, we can rewrite that as P of negative three times h of negative three.
And using the graphs, we see that for an x value of negative three, the y value for P
is two. And the x value of negative three corresponds to a y value of negative two for
H. Two times negative two is negative four. So
that's our value for P times h of negative three. In this video, we saw how to add two functions,
subtract two functions, multiply two functions, and divide two functions in the following
way. When you compose two functions, you apply the first function, and then you apply the
second function to the output of the first function. For example, the first function
might compute population size from time in years. So its input would be time in years,
since a certain date, as output would be number of people in the population. The second function
g, might compute health care costs as a function of population size. So it will take population
size as input, and its output will be healthcare costs. If you put these functions together,
that is compose them, then you'll go all the way from time in years to healthcare costs.
This is your composition, g composed with F. The composition of two functions, written
g with a little circle, f of x is defined as follows. g composed with f of x is G evaluated
on f of x, we can think of it schematically and diagram f x on a number x and produces
a number f of x, then g takes that output f of x and produces a new number, g of f of
x. Our composition of functions g composed with F is the function that goes all the way
from X to g of f of x. Let's work out some examples where our functions are defined by
tables of values. If we want to find g composed with F of four, by definition, this means
g of f of four. To evaluate this expression, we always work from the inside out. So we
start with the x value of four, and we find f of four, using the table of values for f
of x, when x equals four, f of x is seven, so we can replace F of four with the number
seven. Now we need to evaluate g of seven, seven becomes our new x value in our table
of values for G, the x value of seven corresponds to the G of X value of 10. So g of seven is
equal to 10. We found that g composed with F of four is equal to 10. If instead we want
to find f composed with g of four, well, we can rewrite that as f of g of four Again work
from the inside out. Now we're trying to find g of four. So four is our x value. And we
use our table of values for G to see that g of four is one. So we replaced you a four
by one. And now we need to evaluate f of one. Using our table for F values, f of one is
eight. Notice that when we've computed g of f of four, we got a different answer than
when we computed f of g of four. And in general, g composed with F is not the same thing as
f composed with g. Please pause the video and take a moment to compute the next two
examples. We can replace f composed with F of two by the equivalent expression, f of
f of two. Working from the inside out, we know that f of two is three, and f of three
is six. If we want to find f composed with g of six, rewrite that as f of g of six, using
the table for g, g of six is eight. But F of eight, eight is not on the table as an
x value for the for the f function. And so there is no F of eight, this does not exist,
we can say that six is not in the domain, for F composed with g. Even though it was
in the domain of g, we couldn't follow all the way through and get a value for F composed
with g of six. Next, let's turn our attention to the composition of functions that are given
by equations. p of x is x squared plus x and q of x as negative
2x. We want to find q composed with P of one. As usual, I can rewrite this as Q of P of
one and work from the inside out. P of one is one squared plus one, so that's two. So
this is the same thing as Q of two. But Q of two is negative two times two or negative
four. So this evaluates to negative four. In this next example, we want to find q composed
with P of some arbitrary x, or rewrite it as usual as Q of p of x and work from the
inside out. Well, p of x, we know the formula for that. That's x squared plus x. So I can
replace my P of x with that expression. Now, I'm stuck with evaluating q on x squared plus
x. Well, Q of anything is negative two times that thing. So q of x squared plus x is going
to be negative two times the quantity x squared plus x, what I've done is I've substituted
in the whole expression x squared plus x, where I saw the X in this formula for q of
x, it's important to use the parentheses here. So that will be multiplying negative two by
the whole expression and not just by the first piece, I can simplify this a bit as negative
2x squared minus 2x. And that's my expression for Q composed with p of x. Notice that if
I wanted to compute q composed with P of one, which I already did in the first problem,
I could just use this expression now, negative two times one squared minus two and I get
negative four, just like I did before. Let's try another one. Let's try p composed with
q of x. First I read write this P of q of x. Working from the inside out, I can replace
q of x with negative 2x. So I need to compute P of negative 2x. Here's my formula for P.
to compute P of this expression, I need to plug in this expression everywhere I see an
x in the formula for P. So that means negative 2x squared plus negative 2x. Again, being
careful to use parentheses to make sure I plug in the entire expression in forex. let
me simplify. This is 4x squared minus 2x. Notice that I got different expressions for
Q of p of x, and for P of q of x. Once again, we see that q composed with P is not necessarily
equal to P composed with Q. Please pause the video and try this last example yourself.
rewriting. And working from the inside out, we're going to replace p of x with its expression
x squared plus x. And then we need to evaluate p on x squared plus x. That means we plug
in x squared plus x, everywhere we see an x in this formula, so that's x squared plus
x quantity squared plus x squared plus x. Once again, I can simplify by distributing
out, that gives me x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus x squared plus x squared plus x,
or x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus 2x squared plus x. In this last set of examples, we're
asked to go backwards, we're given a formula for a function of h of x. But we're supposed
to rewrite h of x as a composition of two functions, F and G. Let's think for a minute,
which of these two functions gets applied first, f composed with g of x, let's see,
that means f of g of x. And since we evaluate these expressions from the inside out, we
must be applying g first, and then F. In order to figure out what what f and g could be,
I like to draw a box around some thing inside my expression for H, so I'm going to draw
a box around x squared plus seven, then whatever's inside the box, that'll be my function, g
of x, the first function that gets applied, whatever happens to the box, in this case,
taking the square root sign, that becomes my outside function, my second function f. So here, we're gonna say g of x is equal to
x squared plus seven, and f of x is equal to the square root of x, let's just check
and make sure that this works. So I need to check that when I take the composition, f
composed with g, I need to get the same thing as my original h. So let's see, if I do f
composed with g of x, well, by definition, that's f of g of x, working from the inside
out, I can replace g of x with its formula x squared plus seven. So I need to evaluate
f of x squared plus seven. That means I plug in x squared plus seven, into the formula
for for F. So that becomes the square root of x squared plus seven to the it works because
it matches my original equation. So we found a correct answer a correct way of breaking
h down as a composition of two functions. But I do want to point out, this is not the
only correct answer. I'll write down my formula for H of X again, and this time, I'll put
the box in a different place, I'll just box the x squared. If I did that, then my inside
function of my first function, g of x would be x squared. And my second function is what
happens to the box. So my f of x is what happens to the box, and the box gets added seven to
it, and taking the square root. So in other words, f of x is going to be the square root
of x plus seven. Again, I can check that this works. If I do f composed with g of x, that's
f of g of x. So now g of x is x squared. So I'm taking f of x squared. When I plug in
x squared for x, I do in fact, get the square root of x squared plus seven. So this is that
alternative, correct solution. In this video, we learn to evaluate the composition of functions.
by rewriting it and working from the inside out. We also learn to break apart a complicated
function into a composition of two functions by boxing one piece of the function and letting
the first function applied in the composition. Let that be the inside of the box, and the
second function applied in the composition be whatever happens to the box. The inverse of a function undoes what the
function does. So the inverse of tying your shoes would be to untie them. And the inverse
of the function that adds two to a number would be the function that subtracts two from
a number. This video introduces inverses and their properties. Suppose f of x is a function
defined by this chart. In other words, Have two is three, f of three is five, f of four
is six, and f of five is one, the inverse function for F written f superscript. Negative
1x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to three, F inverse takes three, back to two.
So we write this f superscript, negative one of three is to. Similarly, since f takes three
to five, F inverse takes five to three. And since f takes four to six, f inverse of six
is four. And since f takes five to one, f inverse of one is five. I'll use these numbers
to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart of values when y equals f of x and the chart
of values when y equals f inverse of x are closely related. They share the same numbers,
but the x values for f of x correspond to the y values for f inverse of x, and the y
values for f of x correspond to the x values for f inverse of x. That leads us to the first
key fact inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x. I'm going to plot the points for
y equals f of x in blue. Next, I'll plot the points for y equals f inverse of x in red.
Pause the video for a moment and see what kind of symmetry you observe in this graph.
How are the blue points related to the red points, you might have noticed that the blue
points and the red points are mirror images over the mirror line, y equals x. So our second
key fact is that the graph of y equals f inverse of x can be obtained from the graph of y equals
f of x by reflecting over the line y equals x. This
makes sense, because inverses, reverse the roles of war annex. In the same example, let's
compute f inverse of f of two, this open circle means composition. In other words, we're computing
f inverse of f of two, we compute this from the inside out. So that's f inverse of three.
Since F of two is three, and f inverse of three, we see as to similarly, we can compute
f of f inverse of three. And that means we take f of f inverse of three. Since f inverse
of three is two, that's the same thing as computing F of two, which is three. Please
pause the video for a moment and compute these other compositions. You should have found
that in every case, if you take f inverse of f of a number, you get back to the very
same number you started with. And similarly, if you take f of f inverse of any number,
you get back to the same number you started with. So in general, f inverse of f of x is
equal to x, and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This is the mathematical way of
saying that F and n f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different example. Suppose
that f of x is x cubed. Pause the video for a moment, and guess what the inverse of f
should be. Remember, F inverse undoes the work that F does. You might have guessed that
f inverse of x is going to be the cube root function, we can check that this is true by
looking at f of f inverse of x, that's F of the cube root of function, which means the
cube root function cubed, which gets us back to x. Similarly,
if we compute f inverse of f of x, that's the cube root of x cubed. And we get back to excellence again. So the
cube root function really is the inverse of the cubing function. When we compose the two
functions, we get back to the number that we started with. It'd be nice to have a more
systematic way of finding inverses of functions besides guessing and checking. One method
uses the fact that inverses reverse the roles of y and x. So if we want to find the inverse
of the function, f of x equals five minus x over 3x. We can write it as y equals five
minus x over 3x. Reverse the roles of y and x To get x equals five minus y over three
y, and then solve for y. To solve for y, let's multiply both sides by three y. Bring all
terms with y's in them to the left side, and alternate without wizened them to the right
side, factor out the why. And divide to isolate why this gives us f inverse of x as five over
3x plus one. Notice that our original function f and our inverse function, f inverse are
both rational functions, but they're not the reciprocals of each other. And in general,
f inverse of x is not usually equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because
when we write two to the minus one, that does mean one of our two, but f to the minus one
of x means the inverse function and not the reciprocal. It's natural to ask us all functions
have inverse functions. That is for any function you might encounter. Is there always a function
that its is its inverse? In fact, the answer is no. See, if you can come up with an example
of a function that does not have an inverse function. The word function here is key. Remember
that a function is a relationship between x values and y values, such that for each
x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value. One example of a function that does
not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals x squared. To see that, the inverse of this function is not a function.
Note that for the x squared function, the number two and the number negative two, both
go to number four. So if I had an inverse, you would have to send four to both two and
negative two, the inverse would not be a function, it might be easier to understand the problem,
when you look at a graph of y equals x squared. Recall that inverse functions reverse the
roles of y and x and flip the graph over the line y equals x. But when I flipped the green
graph over the line y equals x, I get this red graph. This red graph is not the graph
of a function because it violates the vertical line test. The reason that violates the vertical
line test is because the original green function violates the horizontal line test, and has
2x values with the same y value. In general, a function f has an inverse function if and
only if the graph of f satisfies the horizontal line test, ie every horizontal line intersects
the graph. In it most one point, pause the video for a moment and see which of these
four graphs satisfy the horizontal line test. In other words, which of the four corresponding
functions would have an inverse function? You may have found that graphs A and B violate
the horizontal line test. So their functions would not have inverse functions. But graph
C and D satisfy the horizontal line test. So these graphs represent functions that do
have inverses. functions that satisfy the horizontal line test are sometimes called
One to One functions. Equivalently a function is one to one, if for any two different x
values, x one and x two, the y value is f of x one and f of x two are different numbers.
Sometimes, as I said, f is one to one, if, whenever f of x one is equal to f of x two,
then x one has to equal x two. As our last example, let's try to find P inverse of x,
where p of x is the square root of x minus two drawn here. If we graph P inverse on the
same axis as p of x, we get the following graph simply by flipping over the line y equals
x. If we try to solve the problem algebraically we can write y equal to a squared of x minus
two, reverse the roles of y and x and solve for y by squaring both sides adding two. Now
if we were to graph y equals x squared plus two, that would look like a parabola, it would
look like the red graph we've already drawn together with another arm on the left side.
But we know that our actual inverse function consists only of this right arm, we can specify
this algebraically by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than or equal to zero.
This corresponds to the fact that on the original graph for the square root of x, y was only
greater than or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain and range of P and P
inverse, we know that the domain of P is all values of x such that x minus two is greater
than or equal to zero. Since we can't take the square root of a negative number. This
corresponds to x values being greater than or equal to two, or an interval notation,
the interval from two to infinity. The range of P, we can see from the graph is all y value
is greater than or equal to zero, or the interval from zero to infinity. Similarly, based on
the graph, we see the domain of P inverse is x values greater than or equal to zero,
the interval from zero to infinity. And the range of P inverse is Y values greater than
or equal to two, or the interval from two to infinity. If you look closely at these
domains and ranges, you'll notice that the domain of P corresponds exactly to the range
of P inverse, and the range of P corresponds to the domain of P inverse. This makes sense, because inverse functions
reverse the roles of y and x. The domain of f inverse of x is the x values for F inverse,
which corresponds to the y values or the range of F. The range of f inverse is the y values
for F inverse, which correspond to the x values or the domain of f. In this video, we discussed
five key properties of inverse functions. inverse functions, reverse the roles of y
and x. The graph of y equals f inverse of x is the graph of y equals f of x reflected
over the line y equals x. When we compose F with F inverse, we get the identity function
y equals x. And similarly, when we compose f inverse with F, that brings x to x. In other
words, F and F inverse undo each other. The function f of x has an inverse function if
and only if the graph of y equals f of x satisfies the horizontal line test. And finally, the
domain of f is the range of f inverse and the range of f is the domain of f inverse.
These properties of inverse functions will be important when we study exponential functions
and their inverses logarithmic functions. 

Transcript for: Precalculus Course
This video introduces functions and their
domains and ranges. A function is a correspondence between input numbers, usually the x values
and output numbers, usually the y values, that sends each input number to exactly one
output number. Sometimes a function is thought of as a rule or machine, in which you can
feed in x values as input and get out y values as output. So, non mathematical example of
a function might be the biological mother function, which takes as input and a person,
and it gives us output their biological mother. This function satisfies the condition that
each input number object person, in this case, get sent to exactly one output person. Because
if you take any person, they just have one biological mother. So that rule does give
you a function. But if I change things around, and just use the the mother function, which
sends to each person, their mother, that's no longer gonna be a function, because there
are some people who have more than one mother, right, they could have a biological mother
and adopted mother, or a mother and stepmother or any number of situations. So since there's,
there's at least some people who you would put it as input, and then you'd get like more
than one possible output that violates this, this rule of functions, that would not be
a function. Now, most of the time, we'll work with functions that are described with equations,
not in terms of mothers. So for example, we can have the function y equals x squared plus
one. This can also be written as f of x equals x squared plus one. Here, f of x is function
notation that stands for the output value of y. Notice that this notation is not representing
multiplication, we're not multiplying f by x, instead, we're going to be putting in a
value for access input and getting out a value of f of x or y. For example, if we want to
evaluate f of two, we're plugging in two as input for x either in this equation, or in
that equation. Since F of two means two squared plus one, f of two is going to equal five.
Similarly, f of five means I plug in five for x. So that's going to be five squared
plus one, or 26. Sometimes it's useful to evaluate a function on a more complicated
expression involving other variables. In this case, remember, the functions value on any
expression, it's just what you what you get when you plug in that whole expression for
x. So f of a plus three is going to be the quantity a plus three squared plus one, we
could rewrite that as a squared plus six a plus nine plus one, or a squared plus six
a plus 10. When evaluating a function on a complex expression, it's important to keep
the parentheses when you plug in for x. That way, you evaluate the function on the whole
expression. For example, it would be wrong to write f of a plus three equals a plus three
squared plus one without the parentheses, because that would imply we were just squaring
the three and not the whole expression, a plus three. Sometimes the function is described
with a graph instead of an equation. In this example, this graph is supposed to represent
the function g of x. Not all graphs actually represent functions. For example, the graph
of a circle doesn't represent a function. That's because the graph of a circle violates
the vertical line test, you can draw a vertical line, and I'll intersect the graph in more
than one point. But our graph it left satisfies the vertical line test, any vertical line
intersects the graph, and at most one point, that means is a function because every x value
will have at most one y value that corresponds to it. Let's evaluate gf two, note that two
is an x value. And we'll use the graph to find the corresponding y value. So I look
for two on the x axis and find the point on the graph. If that has that x value, that's
right here. Now I can look at the y value of that point looks like three, and therefore
g of two is equal to three. If I try to do the same thing to evaluate g of five, I run
into trouble. Five is an x value, I look for it on the x axis. But there's no point on
the graph that has that x value. Therefore, g of five is undefined, or we can say it does
not exist. The question of what x values and y values make sense for a function leads us
to a discussion of domain and range. The domain of a function is all possible x values that
make sense for that function. The range is the y values that makes sense for the function.
In this example, we saw that the x value of five didn't have a corresponding y value for
this function. So the x value of five is not in the domain of our function J. To find the
x values in the domain, we have to look at the x values that correspond to points on
the graph. One way to do that is to take the shadow or projection of the graph onto the
x axis and see what x values are hit. It looks like we're hitting all x values, starting
at negative eight, and continuing up to four. So our domain is the x's between negative
eight, and for including those endpoints, or we can write this in interval notation
as negative eight comma four with square brackets. To find the range of the function we look
for the y value is corresponding to points on this graph, we can do that by taking the
shadow or projection of the graph onto the y axis, we seem to be hitting our Y values
from negative five, up through three. So our range is wise between negative five and three
are an interval notation, negative five, three with square brackets. If we made a function
that's described as an equation instead of a graph, one way to find the domain and range
are to graph the function. But it's often possible to find the domain at least more
quickly, by using algebraic considerations. We think about what x values it makes sense
to plug into this expression, and what x values need to be excluded, because they make the
algebraic expression impossible to evaluate. Specifically, to find the domain of a function,
we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero. Since we can't divide by
zero, we also need to exclude x values that make an expression inside a square root sign
negative. Since we can't take the square root of a negative number. In fact, we need to
exclude values that make an expression inside any even root negative because we can't take
an even root of a negative number, even though we can take an odd root like a cube root of
a negative number. Later, when we look at logarithmic functions, we'll have some additional
exclusions that we have to make. But for now, these two principles should handle all functions
We'll see. So let's apply them to a couple examples. For the function in part A, we don't
have any square root signs, but we do have a denominator. So we need to exclude x values
that make the denominator zero. In other words, we need x squared minus 4x plus three to not
be equal to zero. If we solve x squared minus 4x plus three equal to zero, we can do that
by factoring. And that gives us x equals three or x equals one, so we need to exclude these
values. All other x values should be fine. So if I draw the number line, I can put on
one and three and just dig out a hole at both of those. And my domain includes everything
else on the number line. In interval notation, this means my domain is everything from negative
infinity to one, together with everything from one to three, together with everything
from three to infinity. In the second example, we don't have any denominator to worry about,
but we do have a square root sign. So we need to exclude any x values that make three minus
2x less than zero. In other words, we can include all x values for which three minus
2x is greater than or equal to zero. Solving that inequality gives us three is greater
than or equal to 2x. In other words, x is less than or equal to three halves. If I can
draw this on the number line, or write it in interval notation, notice that three halves
is included. And that's because three minus 2x is allowed to be zero, I can take the square
root of zero, that's just zero. And that's not a problem. Finally, let's look at a more
complicated function that involves both the square root and his denominator. Now there
are two things I need to worry about. I need the denominator to not be equal to zero, and
I need the stuff inside the square root sign to be greater than or equal to zero. from
our earlier work, we know the first condition means that x is not equal to three, and x
is not equal to one. And the second condition means that x is less than or equal to three
halves. Let's draw both of those conditions on the number line. x is not equal to three
and x is not equal to one means we've got everything except those two dug out points.
And the other condition x is less than or equal to three halves means we can have three
halves, and everything to the left of it not to be in our domain. And to be legit for our
function, we need both of these conditions to be true. So I'm going to connect these
conditions with an and and that means we're looking for numbers on the number line that
are colored both red and blue. So I'll draw that above and purple. So that's everything
from three halves to one, I have to dig out one because one was a problem for the denominator.
And then I can continue for all the things that are colored both both colors red and
blue. So my final domain is going to be let's see negative infinity, up to but not including
one together with one, but not including it to three halves, and I include three half
since that was colored both red and blue. Also, in this video, we talked about functions,
how to evaluate them, and how to find domains and ranges. This video is a brief introduction
to increasing and decreasing functions based on their graphs. In this first example, I've
graphed two lines, the first line is an increasing function. Because as the x values go from
left to right, the y values are going up. this can be written more formally, by saying
if x two is bigger than x one, these are supposed to be x values. So that means that x two is
some x value, that's to the right so that it's bigger than x one. So whenever we have
an x value x to this bigger than x one, increasing means that f of x two has to be bigger than
f of x one, so that the y values are getting bigger when the x values are bigger. The second
line is an example of a decreasing function. Because here as the x values increased from
left to right, the y values are going down. So again, we can write this more formally
by saying that whenever we have an x value x two that's bigger than x one, for example,
this might be x two, and this might be x one, then the y value f of x two is less than f
of x one this time, because here, when we have a bigger x value, we want to have a smaller
y value to be decreasing. This second example gives the graph of a function that's increasing
in some places, but decreasing and others. This part of the graph, here the functions
decreasing, because as the x values increased from left to right, the y values go down.
Over here, we also have a part of the graph where the function is decreasing. Now this
part of the graph, the function is increasing, because as x goes from left to right, the
y values are going up. I've marked that one in green, for increasing. And finally, on
this part of the graph, the functions are neither increasing nor decreasing, it's completely
flat or constant. Now we're asked to describe the intervals on which the graph is increasing
or decreasing. So we describe those intervals in terms of the x values. It wouldn't make
sense to describe them in terms of the y values because the y values can be the same for different
parts of the graph, but the x values are always unique. Describe where this function is decreasing.
That's for x values between negative four and negative two, and between four and seven.
I can write this using inequalities as negative for less than x less than negative two, for
less than x less than seven. It's not important whether I use less than or less than or equal
to signs here, I'm going to use less than or equal to signs at the endpoints of the
functions domain where the function stops existing altogether. And I'll use strict less
than signs just where the function starts or stops decreasing in the middle of its domain.
But again, that's not important. Describe where the function is increasing. That's for
x values in between negative two, and one. So I can write that as an inequality as negative
two less than x less than one, I can also describe these intervals in interval notation.
So that would be close bracket, negative four, negative to open bracket, a cup sign for union,
and then four comma seven, for the decreasing part, and the increasing part is negative
two, comma one, I'm going to modify my graph just a little bit. Now by putting arrows on
the end, what I have arrows instead of dots are just hard stops, that signifies that the
function continues in the same direction forever. So if I write it like that, then the place
where the function is increasing is still the same, it's still going to be from x values
going from negative two to one. But now the decreasing part of the function extends further.
So this section, these x values extend all the way out to infinity in it, we assume that
it keeps going keeps decreasing here. So I would write that as for infinity, and similar
the the left part, I would write as negative infinity, negative two, because the function
is going on forever in this direction to set x values go all the way to negative infinity
on that chunk. So when talking about increasing and decreasing parts of functions based on
graphs, the thing to remember is that x is going to be heading from left to right. As
long as you do that, increasing just means that y goes up. Decreasing means that y goes
down. And if you're after describing the intervals, you have to do that in terms of x values.
This video is about identifying maximums and minimums for functions from their graphs.
We'll start with some definitions. A function f of x has an absolute maximum at the x value
of x equals C, if the y value at x equals C is as big as it ever gets. We can write
this more precisely by saying that f of c, that's the y value at x equals C is bigger
than or equal to f of x, that's the y value at some other x value for all x values in
the domain of f, that biggest y value f a c is called the absolute maximum value for
F. And the point with an x value and a y value given is called an absolute maximum point.
If I have a graph of a function, then the absolute maximum value, f of c is the highest
value that function ever achieves. And the absolute maximum point is the point where
it achieves that value. Now it's possible for a function to have more than one absolute
maximum point, if there happens to be a tie where that highest value is achieved. But
a function can only have at most one absolute maximum value. function f of x has an absolute
minimum at x equals C. If the y value at x equals C is as small as it ever gets. We can
write this more precisely by saying that f of c is less than or equal to f of x for all
x values in the domain of f. the y value f of c is called the absolute minimum value
of f. And the point c f of c is called an absolute minimum point in the graph of f of
x. f of c is now The lowest y value that the graph ever achieves. And the point c f of
c is the point where it achieves this very low y value. For example, this function has
an absolute minimum value of about negative eight, and it has an absolute minimum point
with coordinates, three, negative eight. If this function stops here, and has domain from
x values just from zero to four, then the function will have an absolute maximum value
of 10, achieved at the point with coordinates for 10. If however, the function keeps going
on forever, then it will have no absolute maximum value at all. absolute maximum minimum
values can also be called global maximum and minimum values. A function f of x has a local
maximum at x equals C. If the y value at the x value of c is bigger than any y values nearby,
it doesn't have to be the biggest y value anywhere in the domain. For example, for this
function, there's bigger y values up here, it just has to be the biggest y value nearby,
or more precisely, in an open interval of X values around C. We can write this by saying
that f of c is bigger than or equal to f of x for all x values, and an open interval around
C, the y value f OC is called a local maximum value for F. And the point with coordinates
c f OC is called a local maximum point, a function f of x has a local minimum at x equals
C. If f of c is less than or equal to f of x, for all x values in an open interval around
the y value f of c is called a local minimum value. And the point with coordinate c f a
c is called a local minimum point. A function might have many local minimum values. In this
example, assuming that the domain is from zero to four, we have a local minimum point
at x equals three, because this point here is the lowest point anywhere nearby. It also
happens to be an absolute minimum point. Turning our attention to local maximum points. This
function has a local maximum point at one to say, because this point here is the highest
point anywhere nearby, even though it's not the highest point anywhere in the domain since
their highest points higher points over here. So we have a local max point at one two, which
is not an absolute max. different sources use different conventions as far as whether
the point 410 up here counts as a local maximum point or not. Some sources do consider it
a local maximum, since it's the highest point anywhere nearby. But other sources say that
it doesn't count as a local maximum, for the technical reason that you can't get an open
interval values around four because the function is not defined in an open interval around
four because it's domain stops at four. So I'll just write this as a caution that some
sources do not consider for 10 to be a local max point, because f is not defined. In an
open interval around x equals four, local maximum and minimum values can also be called
relative maximum and minimum values. Please pause the video for a moment to mark all local
maximum minimum points on the graph of this function, as well as all absolute max and
min points. The function has a local max point here at the point with coordinates approximately
say 2.7 3.3 It's a local max point because it's the highest point anywhere nearby. There's
a local min point right here at the point with coordinates to to, since this is the
lowest point anywhere nearby. If this point actually existed, it would also be a local
main points as well as an absolute min point. But this drilled out circle means that point
is not actually part of the graph. So there's no local min point here, and no absolute min
points. The point here with coordinates 04, is considered by some sources to be a local
max point, but by other sources is not considered a local max point. Since the function is not
defined in an open interval around zero, turning our attention to absolute maximum and points
while there's no absolute max points as the function keeps going up and up and up forever.
There's also no absolute min points, because the function just keeps going down and down
a little by little and never actually achieves a lowest value. Now if we're talking about
local maximum values, that's just the y values of the local maxima endpoints. So there's
a local max value at this y value of 3.3. And there's a local min value of two this
points y value. There are no absolute max or min values for this function. In this video,
we defined absolute and local, max and min points and values. This video is about symmetry
of graphs and functions. We say that a graph is symmetric with respect to the x axis, if
the graph has mirror symmetry, with the x axis as the mirror line. This graph here is
an example. Here is the mirror line. Notice that the point five three is on this graph.
And so it's mirror image, five, negative three is also on the graph. Similarly, the point
two, two is on the graph and its mirror image, two, negative two is on the graph. For any
point x, y on a graph, its mirror image when you flip over the x axis will have coordinates
the same x coordinate and the opposite of the y coordinates. Therefore, we can say that
a graph is symmetric with respect to the x axis. If whenever a point x, y is on the graph,
the point x negative y is also on the graph. We say that a graph is symmetric with respect
to the y axis, if it has mirror symmetry, with the y axis as the mirror line. This graph
is symmetric with respect to the y axis, here is the mirror line. Notice that the point
with coordinates two three is on this graph. Its mirror image, which is also on the graph
has coordinates negative two, three, so the same y coordinate, but the opposite x coordinate.
And in fact, if I take any point with coordinates x, y, and I want its mirror image with the
y axis as a mirror line, I'm going to get the point with the same height the same y
coordinate, but the opposite x coordinate. So I can say that a graph is symmetric with
respect to the y axis. If whenever a point x, y is on the graph, the point negative x,
y is also on the graph. Finally, a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin if it
has 180 degree rotational symmetry around the origin. This means that if I spin it by
180 degrees, the graph should line up exactly with itself. Rotating a graph by 180 degrees
is the same thing as turning it upside down. So one way to see if a graph has symmetry
respect to the origin, is to turn it upside down and see if it looks exactly the same.
This one does. playing around with points, I noticed that the point one, negative two
is on this graph. If I rotate that point around the origin by 180 degrees, I get to the point
with coordinates negative one, two. If I start with a point on the graph with coordinates,
two, three, And I rotate by 180 degrees, I get the point with coordinates negative two,
negative three. And in general, if I start with a point x, y, and I rotate that 180 degrees
around the origin, I get the point with coordinates negative x, negative y. so we can say that
a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. If whenever a point x, y is on the graph,
the point negative x negative y is also on the graph. Please pause the video for a moment
and decide which of these graphs are symmetric with respect to the x axis, the y axis and
the origin. Some graphs may have more than one type of symmetry. Graph a is symmetric
with respect to the origin. Because if you rotate it by 180 degrees, that is you turn
it upside down, it looks exactly the same. It does not have any mirror symmetry, so it's
not symmetric with respect to the x axis or the y axis. Graph B does have mirror symmetry,
I'll draw on the two mirror lines. So it's both symmetric with respect to the x axis
and symmetric with respect to the y axis. It also looks exactly the same upside down.
So it's also symmetric with respect to the origin. Graph C is symmetric with respect
to the y axis, but has no other symmetry. And graph D is symmetric with respect to the
x axis with no other symmetry. We use the words even and odd to describe functions whose
graphs have certain kinds of symmetry. A function is even if its graph is symmetric, with respect
to the y axis. Remember that being symmetric with respect to the y axis means that whenever
a point x, y is on the graph, its mirror image, negative x, y is also on the graph. That is,
the y values corresponding to x and negative x are the same. Using function notation, I
can write these points as the points with coordinates x, f of x and negative x, f of
negative X, since the y value for a function is given by f of its x value. So we can say
that a function f of x is even if F of negative X equals f of x, for all x values in its domain,
the function has the same height at x and negative x. For example, we can see the function
f of x equals x squared plus three is even. And one way to see this is by looking at its
graph, which looks pretty much like the graph I've drawn. And that is saying that this graph
is symmetric across the y axis. But we can also check that this function is even algebraically.
without knowing anything about this graph, all we have to do is check that F of negative
X is equal to f of x. So if we plug in at negative x for x into this formula, that's
negative x squared plus three, but negative x squared is the same thing as x squared.
And so this is exactly the same thing as f of x. And the property of being even is satisfied.
We say that a function f of x is odd, if its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin.
Recall that a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin means that whenever a point
x, y is on the graph, it's 180 80 degree rotated point, negative x, negative y is also on the
graph. That is the graph y value at x. And the graphs y value at negative x are the opposites
of each other, same magnitude but opposite sign. If we use function notation, for the
coordinates of these points, this one is x, f of x, and this one is negative x, f of negative
x, right because the y value for a function at the x value of negative x is just F of
negative X. So for a function to be odd, we see that F of negative X, that y value has
to be the opposite of f of x, the other guys y value. A function f of x is odd if F of
negative X is the negative of f of x for all x in its domain. Let's look at this example.
We could draw its graph and verify the functions odd by seeing that rotational symmetry around
the order On this graph, but we can also figure it out algebraically by checking to see if
F of negative X is equal to negative of f of x. So let's plug in negative x for x in
the formula for F, that gives us five times negative x minus one over negative x, that
simplifies to negative 5x plus one over x. And we can see that that is actually the negative
5x minus one over x by factoring out a negative sign, which is negative f of x. So the property
for being odd holds. In this video, we talked about symmetry with respect to the x axis
symmetry with respect to the y axis, and symmetry with respect to the origin. functions that
are symmetric with respect to the y axis are even functions and functions that are symmetric
with respect to the origin, or odd functions. There's no word for functions that are symmetric
with respect to the x axis. And that's because if your graph is symmetric with respect to
the x axis, it's not going to be a function. This video gives the graphs of some commonly
used functions that I call the toolkit functions. The first function is the function y equals
x, let's plot a few points on the graph of this function. If x is zero, y zero, if x
is one, y is one, and so on y is always equal to x doesn't have to just be an integer, it
can be any real number, and we'll connecting the dots we get a straight line through the
origin. Let's look at the graph of y equals x squared. If x is zero, y is zero. So we'll
go through the origin again. If x is one, y is one, and x is negative one, y is also
one, the x value of two gives a y value of four and the x value of negative two gives
a y value of four also connecting the dots, we get a parabola. That is this, this function
is an even function. That means it has mirror symmetry across the y axis, the left side
it looks like exactly like the mirror image of the right side. That happens because when
you square a positive number, like two, you get the exact same y value as when you square
it's a mirror image x value of negative two. The next function y equals x cubed. I'll call
that a cubic. Let's plot a few points when x is zero, y is zero. When x is one, y is
one, when x is negative one, y is negative one, two goes with the point eight way up
here, and an x value of negative two is going to give us negative eight. If I connect the
dots, I get something that looks kind of like this. This function is what's called an odd
function, because it has 180 degree rotational symmetry occur around the origin. If I rotate
this whole graph by 180 degrees, or in other words, turn the paper upside down, I'll get
exactly the same shape. The reason this function has this odd symmetry is because when I cube
a positive number, and get its y value, I get n cube the corresponding negative number
to get its y value, the negative number cubed gives us exactly the negative of the the y
value we get with cubing the positive number. Let's look at the next example. Y equals the
square root of x. Notice that the domain of this function is just x values bigger than
or equal to zero because we can't take the square root of a negative number. Let's plug
in a few x values. X is zero gives y is 0x is one square root of one is one, square root
of four is two, and connecting the dots, I get a function that looks like this. The absolute
value function is next. Again, if we plug in a few points, x is zero goes with y equals
0x plus one gives us one, the absolute value of negative one is one to two is on the graph
and the absolute value of negative two is to I'm ending up getting a V shaped graph.
It also has even or a mirror symmetry. Y equals two to the x is what's known as an exponential
function. That's because the variable x is in the exponent. If I plot a few points, two
to the zero is one Two to the one is to two squared is four, two to the minus one is one
half. I'll plot these on my graph. Let me fill in a few more points. So let's see, two
cubed is eight, that's way up here. And negative two gives me 1/4 1/8. Connecting the Dots,
I get something that's shaped like this. You might have heard the expression exponential
growth, when talking about, for example, population growth, this is function is represents exponential
growth, it grows very, very steeply. Every time we increase the x coordinate by one we
double the y coordinate. We could also look at a function like y equals three dx, or sometimes
y equals e to the x, where E is just a number about 2.7. These functions look very similar.
It's just the bigger base makes us rise a little more steeply. Now let's look at the
function y equals one over x. It's not defined when x is zero, but I can plug in x equals
one half whenever one half is two. Whenever one is one, and one over two is one half,
by connect the dots, I get this shape in the first quadrant, but I haven't looked at negative
values of x, when x is negative, whenever negative one is negative one, whenever negative
half is negative two, and I get a similar looking piece in the third quadrant. This
is an example of a hyperbola. And it's also an odd function, because it has that 180 degree
rotational symmetry, if I turn the page upside down, it'll look exactly the same. Finally,
let's look at y equals one over x squared. Again, it's not defined when x is zero, but
I can plug in points like one half or X, let's see one over one half squared is one over
1/4, which is four. And one over one squared, one over two squared is a fourth, it looks
pretty much like the previous function is just a little bit more extreme rises a little
more steeply, falls a little more dramatically. But for negative values of x, something a
little bit different goes on. For example, one over negative two squared is just one
over four, which is a fourth. So I can plot that point there, and one over negative one
squared, that's just one. So my curve for negative values of x is gonna lie in the second
quadrant, not the third quadrant. This is an example of an even function because it
has perfect mirror symmetry across the y axis. These are the toolkit functions, and I recommend
you memorize the shape of each of them. That way, you can draw at least a rough sketch
very quickly without having to plug in points. That's all for the graphs of the toolkit functions.
If we change the equation of a function, then the graph of the function changes or transforms
in predictable ways. This video gives some rules and examples for transformations of
functions. To get the most out of this video, it's helpful if you're already familiar with
the graph of some typical functions, I call them toolkit functions, like y equals square
root of x, y equals x squared, y equals the absolute value of x and so on. If you're not
familiar with those graphs, I encourage you to watch my video called toolkit functions
first, before watching this one. I want to start by reviewing function notation. If g
of x represents the function, the square root of x, then we can rewrite these expressions
in terms of square roots. For example, g of x minus two is the same thing as the square
root of x minus two. g of quantity x minus two means we plug in x minus two everywhere
we see an x, so that would be the same thing as the square root of quantity x minus two.
In this second example, I say that we're subtracting two on the inside of the function, because
we're subtracting two before we apply the square root function. Whereas on the first
example, I say that the minus two is on the outside of the function. We're doing the square
root function first and then subtracting two. In this third example, g of 3x. We're multiplying
by three on the inside of the function. To evaluate this in terms of square root, we
plug in the entire 3x for x, and this square root function, that gives us the square root
of 3x. In the next example, we're multiplying by three on the outside of the function, this
is just three times the square root of x. Finally, g of minus x means the square root
of minus x. This might look a little odd, because we're not used to taking the square
root of a negative number. But remember that if x itself is negative, like negative to
the negative x will be negative negative two or positive two. So we're really be taking
the square root of a positive number in that case, let me record which of these are inside
and which of these are outside of my function. In this next set of examples, we're using
the same function g of x squared of x. But this time, we're starting with an expression
with square roots in it, and trying to write it in terms of g of x. So the first example,
the plus 17 is on the outside of my function, because I'm taking the square root of x first,
and then adding 17. So I can write this as g of x plus 17. In the second example, I'm
taking x and adding 12 first, then I take the square root of the whole thing. Since
I'm adding the 12 to x first that's on the inside of my function. So I write that as
g of the quantity x plus 12. Remember that this notation means I plug in the entire x
plus 12, into the square root sign, which gives me exactly square root of x plus 12.
And this next example of doing the square root first and then multiplying by negative
36, so i minus 36 multiplications, outside my function, I can rewrite this as minus 36
times g of x. Finally, in this last example, I take x multiplied by a fourth and then apply
the square root of x. So that's the same thing as g of 1/4 x by 1/4. x is on the inside of
my function. In other words, it's inside the parentheses when I use function notation.
Let's graph the square root of x and two transformations of this function, y equals the square root
of x goes to the point 0011. And for two, since the square root of four is two, it looks
something like this. In order to graph y equals the square root of x minus two, notice that
the minus two is on the outside of the function, that means we're going to take the square
root of x first and then subtract two. So for example, if we start with the x value
of zero, and compute the square root of zero, that's zero, then we subtract two to give
us a y value of negative two, an x value of one, which under the square root function
had a y value of one now has a y value that's decreased by two, one minus two is negative
one. And finally, an x value of four, which under the square root function had a y value
of two now has a y value of two minus two or zero, its y value is also decreased by
two. If I plot these new points, zero goes with negative two, one goes with negative
one, and four goes with zero, I have my transformed graph. Because I subtracted two on the outside
of my function, my y values were decreased by two, which brought my graph down by two
units. Next, let's look at y equals the square root of quantity x minus two. Now we're subtracting
two on the inside of our function, which means we subtract two from x first and then take
the square root. In order to get the same y value of zero as we had in our blue graph,
we need our x minus two to be zero, so we need our original x to be two. In order to
get the y value of one that we had in our blue graph, we need to be taking the square
root of one, so we need x minus two to be one, which means that we need to start with
an x value of three. And in order to reproduce our y value of two from our original graph,
we need the square root of x minus two to be two, which means we need to start out by
taking the square root of four, which means our x minus two is four, so our x should be
up there at six. If I plot my x values, with my corresponding y values of square root of
x minus two, I get the following graph. Notice that the graph has moved horizontally to the
right by two units. To me, moving down by two units, makes sense because we're subtracting
two, so we're decreasing y's by two units, but the minus two on the inside that kind
of does the opposite of what I expect, I might expect it to to move the graph left I might
expect the x values to be going down by two units, but instead, it moves the graph to
the right because As the x units have to go up by two units, in order to get the right
square root, when I then subtract two units, again, the observations we made for these
transformations of functions hold in general, according to the following rules. First of
all numbers on the outside of the function, like in our example, y equals the square root
of x minus two, those numbers affect the y values, and result in vertical motions, like
we saw, these motions are in the direction you expect. So subtracting two was just down
by two. If we were adding two instead, that would move us up by two numbers on the inside
of the function. That's like our example, y equals the square root of quantity x minus
two, those affect the x values and results in a horizontal motion, these motions go in
the opposite direction from what you expect. Remember, the minus two on the inside actually
shifted our graph to the right, if it had had a plus two on the inside, that would actually
shift our graph to the left. Adding results in a shift those are called translations,
but multiplying like something like y equals three times a squared of x, that would result
in a stretch or shrink. In other words, if I start with the square root of x, and then
when I graph y equals three times the square root of x, that stretches my graph vertically
by a factor of three. Like this, if I want to graph y equals 1/3, times the square root
of x, that shrinks my graph vertically by a factor of 1/3. Finally, a negative sign
results in reflection. For example, if I start with a graph of y equals the square root of
x, and then want to graph y equals the square root of negative x, that's going to do a reflection
in the horizontal direction because the negative is on the inside of the square root sign.
A reflection in the horizontal direction means reflection across the y axis. If instead I
want to graph y equals negative A squared of x, that negative sign on the outside means
a vertical reflection, a reflection across the x axis. Pause the video for a moment and
see if you could describe what happens in these four transformations. In the first example,
we're subtracting four on the outside of the function. adding or subtracting means a translation
or shift. And since we're on the outside of the function affects the y value, so that's
moving us vertically. So this transformation should take the square root of graph and move
it down by four units, that would look something like this. In the next example, we're adding
12 on the inside, that's still a translation. But now we're moving horizontally. And so
since we go the opposite direction, we expect we are going to go to the left by 12 units,
that's going to look something like this. And the next example, we're multiplying by
three and introducing a negative sign both on the outside of our function outside our
function means we're affecting the y values. So and multiplication means we're stretching
by a factor of three, the negative sign means we reflect in the vertical direction, here's
stretching by a factor of three vertically, before I apply the minus sign, and now the
minus sign reflects in the vertical direction. Finally, in this last example, we're multiplying
by one quarter on the inside of our function, we know that multiplication means stretch
or shrink. And since we're on the inside, it's a horizontal motion, and it does the
opposite of what we expect. So instead of shrinking by a factor of 1/4, horizontally,
it's actually going to stretch by the reciprocal, a factor of four horizontally. that'll look
something like this. Notice that stretching horizontally by a factor of four looks kind
of like shrinking vertically by a factor of one half. And that's actually borne out by
the algebra, because the square root of 1/4 x is the same thing as the square root of
1/4 times the square root of x, which is the same thing as one half times the square root
of x. And so now we can see algebraically that vertical shrink by a factor of one half
is the same as a horizontal stretch by a factor of four, at least for this function, the square
root function. This video gives some rules for transformations of functions, which I'll
repeat below. numbers on the outside correspond to changes in the y values or vertical motions.
numbers on the inside of the function, affect the x values and raise out in horizontal motions,
adding and subtracting corresponds to translations or shifts. multiplying and dividing by numbers
corresponds to stretches and shrinks. And putting in a negative sign. correspond corresponds
to a reflection, horizontal reflection if the negative sign is on the inside, and a
vertical reflection if the negative sign is on the outside. Knowing these basic rules
about transformations empowers you to be able to sketch graphs of much more complicated
functions, like y equals three times the square root of x plus two, by simply considering
the transformations, one at a time. This video introduces piecewise functions. A piecewise
function is a function whose defined in pieces by two or more different rules that apply
for different x values. The rule for calculating this function is you calculate negative x
squared if x is less than one, but you calculate negative 2x plus three if x is greater than
or equal to one. So if we want to find f of negative two, well, negative two is less than
one. So the first rule applies. And we compute f of negative two by plugging in negative
two for x in the first rule, so that's negative four. Next, we want to find f of one. Well,
one is right on the border in between the two rules. But because we have a greater than
or equal to here, when x is equal to one, we apply this rule. And so we could plug one
into the formula, negative 2x plus three sets negative two times one plus three, which gives
us one as our output. Finally, if we want to compute f of three, since three is bigger
than or equal to one, the second rule applies. And we plug three into that role. That gives
us an answer of negative three. To graph F, it makes sense to also draw the graph in pieces.
First, I'm going to draw the graph of minus x squared, just x squared would be a problem
opening up, so minus x squared is a parabola opening down goes through the points negative
one, negative one and one negative one. So it looks something like this. Now I've drawn
the whole parabola, but the rule actually only applies when x is less than one. So I'll
keep the part of the parabola when x is less than one. And I'll erase the part of the parabola
when x is greater than or equal to one. I'll leave an open circle here, when x equals one
since that point is not included in this definition, either. Next, I'm going to draw the second
piece, the line y equals minus 2x plus three. So that's a line with slope negative two,
and intercept y intercept three, so it goes through this point 03. And then it goes over
by one and down by two. So it goes through the point one, one, over by one down by two.
And  I can continue and draw this straight line.
Again, we only want part of this graph the part where x is greater than or equal to one.
So I'll erase the part where x is less than one, this part here. This time, I'm going
to leave a closed circle, where x is equal to one, since that point is included on that
graph. When drawing this graph, it's good to think about what happens when x equals
one the border point, both in the second role, where we actually include that point. And
in the first rule, where we don't actually include that point, but we kind of have to
draw it in order anyway to draw the open circle here. Now the last question asks us if this
function is continuous. The informal definition of continuity that I'm going to use is that
a function is continuous if you can draw the whole thing without picking up your pencil.
And this case, we can't, because we have to pick up our pencil to get from the jump here,
up to here. So this function is not continuous, it's got a discontinuity when x is one, which
is exactly the border port between the two rules. Often piecewise functions will have
discontinuities, where they transition from one role to the next. However, it's possible
to have a piecewise defined function that has no discontinuity if the two pieces happen
to line up perfectly. For example, if we've changed the functions definition slightly,
I'll call it g of x this time to still be the negative x squared when x is less than
one, but this time, negative 2x plus one, if x is bigger than equal to one, then when
we graph it, The parabola piece will look the same, but the linear piece will be two
units lower than before. And so it'll actually start right here at one, negative one and
go down, and our function will be continuous. That's all for this introduction to piecewise
functions. The inverse of a function undoes what the function does. So the inverse of
tying your shoes would be to untie them. And the inverse of the function that adds two
to a number would be the function that subtracts two from a number. This video introduces inverses
and their properties. Suppose f of x is a function defined by this chart. In other words,
f of two is three, f of three is five, f of four is six, and f of five is one, the inverse
function for F written f superscript. Negative 1x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to
three, F inverse takes three back to two. So we write this f superscript. Negative one
of three is to. Similarly, since f takes three to five, F inverse takes five to three. And
since f takes four to six, f inverse of six is four. And since f takes five to one, f
inverse of one is five. I'll use these numbers to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart
of values when y equals f of x and the chart of values, when y equals f inverse of x are
closely related. They share the same numbers, but the x values for f of x correspond to
the y values for f inverse of x, and the y values for f of x correspond to the x values
for f inverse of x. That leads us to the first key fact inverse functions reverse the roles
of y and x. I'm going to plot the points for y equals f of x in blue. Next, I'll plot the
points for y equals f inverse of x in red. Pause the video for a moment and see what
kind of symmetry you observe in this graph. How are the blue points related to the red
points, you might have noticed that the blue points and the red points are mirror images
over the mirror line, y equals x. So our second key fact is that the graph of y equals f inverse
of x can be obtained from the graph of y equals f of x by reflecting over the line y equals
x. This makes sense, because inverses, reverse the roles of y and x. In the same example,
let's compute f inverse of f of two, this open circle means composition. In other words,
we're computing f inverse of f of two, we compute this from the inside out. So that's
f inverse of three. Since F of two is three, and f inverse of three, we see as to similarly,
we can compute f of f inverse of three. And that means we take f of f inverse of three.
Since f inverse of three is two, that's the same thing as computing F of two, which is
three. Please pause the video for a moment and compute these other compositions. You
should have found that in every case, if you take f inverse of f of a number, you get back
to the very same number you started with. And similarly, if you take f of f inverse
of any number, you get back to the same number you started with. So in general, f inverse
of f of x is equal to x, and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This is the mathematical
way of saying that F and envir f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different example.
Suppose that f of x is x cubed. Pause the video for a moment and guess what the inverse
of f should be. Remember, F inverse undoes the work that F does. You might have guessed
that f inverse of x is going to be the cube root function. We can check that this is true
by looking at f of f inverse of x, that's F of the cube root of function, which means
the cube root function cubed, which gets us back to x. Similarly, If we compute f inverse
of f of x, that's the cube root of x cubed. And we get back to excellence again. So the
cube root function really is the inverse of the cubing function. When we compose the two
functions, we get back to the number that we started with. It'd be nice to have a more
systematic way of finding inverses of functions besides guessing and checking. One method
uses the fact that inverses, reverse the roles of y and x. So if we want to find the inverse
of the function, f of x equals five minus x over 3x, we can write it as y equals five
minus x over 3x. Reverse the roles of y and x to get x equals five minus y over three
y, and then solve for y. To solve for y, let's multiply both sides by three y. Bring all
terms with y's in to the left side, and alternate without y's and then to the right side, factor
out the y and divide to isolate y. This gives us f inverse of x as five over 3x plus one.
Notice that our original function f and our inverse function, f inverse are both rational
functions, but they're not the reciprocals of each other. And then General, f inverse
of x is not usually equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because when we
write two to the minus one, that does mean one or two, but f to the minus one of x means
the inverse function and not the reciprocal. It's natural to ask if all functions have
inverse functions, that is for any function you might encounter. Is there always a function
that it's it is its inverse? In fact, the answer is no. See, if you can come up with
an example of a function that does not have an inverse function. The word function here
is key. Remember that a function is a relationship between x values and y values, such that for
each x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value. One example of a function
that does not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals x squared. To see
that, the inverse of this function is not a function. Note that for the x squared function,
the number two and the number negative two, both go to number four. So if I had an inverse,
it would have to send four to both two and negative two, the inverse would not be a function,
it might be easier to understand the problem, when you look at a graph of y equals x squared.
Recall that inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x and flip the graph over the
line y equals x. But when I flip the green graph over the line y equals x, I get this
red graph. This red graph is not the graph of a function, because it violates the vertical
line test. The reason that violates the vertical line test is because the original green function
violates the horizontal line test, and has 2x values with the same y value. In general,
a function f has an inverse function if and only if the graph of f satisfies the horizontal
line test, ie every horizontal line intersects the graph. And at most one point, pause the
video for a moment and see which of these four graphs satisfy the horizontal line test.
In other words, which of the four corresponding functions would have an inverse function you
may have found that graphs A and B violate the horizontal line test. So their functions
would not have inverse functions. But graphs C and D satisfy the horizontal line test.
So these graphs represent functions that do have inverses. functions that satisfy the
horizontal line test are sometimes called One to One functions. Equivalently a function
is one to one if for any two different x values, x one and x two. the y value is f of x one
and f of x two are done. different numbers. Sometimes as I said, f is one to one, if,
whenever f of x one is equal to f of x two, then x one has to equal x two. As our last
example, let's try to find P inverse of x, where p of x as the square root of x minus
two drawn here, if we graph P inverse on the same axis as p of x, we get the following
graph, simply by flipping over the line y equals x. If we try to solve the problem,
algebraically, we can write y equal to a squared of x minus two, reverse the roles of y and
x and solve for y by squaring both sides and adding two. Now if we were to graph y equals
x squared plus two, that would look like a parabola, it would look like the red graph
we've already drawn together with another arm on the left side. But we know that our
actual inverse function consists only of this right arm, we can specify this algebraically
by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than or equal to zero. This corresponds
to the fact that on the original graph, for the square root of x, y was only greater than
or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain and range of P and P inverse, we
know that the domain of P is all values of x such that x minus two is greater than or
equal to zero. Since we can't take the square root of a negative number. This corresponds
to x values being greater than or equal to two, or an interval notation, the interval
from two to infinity. The range of P, we can see from the graph is our y value is greater
than or equal to zero, or the interval from zero to infinity. Similarly, based on the
graph, we see the domain of P inverse is x values greater than or equal to zero, the
interval from zero to infinity. And the range of P inverse is Y values greater than or equal
to two, or the interval from two to infinity. If you look closely at these domains and ranges,
you'll notice that the domain of P corresponds exactly to the range of P inverse, and the
range of P corresponds to the domain of P inverse. This makes sense, because inverse
functions reverse the roles of y and x. The domain of f inverse of x is the x values for
F inverse, which corresponds to the y values, or the range of F. The range of f inverse
is the y values for F inverse, which correspond to the x values or the domain of f. In this
video, we discussed five key properties of inverse functions. inverse functions, reverse
the roles of y and x. The graph of y equals f inverse of x is the graph of y equals f
of x reflected over the line y equals x. When we compose F with F inverse, we get the identity
function y equals x. And similarly, when we compose f inverse with F, that brings x to
x. In other words, F and F inverse undo each other. The function f of x has an inverse
function if and only if the graph of y equals f of x satisfies the horizontal line test.
And finally, the domain of f is the range of f inverse and the range of f is the domain
of f inverse. These properties of inverse functions will be important when we study
exponential functions and their inverses logarithmic functions. There are different ways of describing
the size of an angle. This video explains how to convert between them. angles are commonly
measured using either degrees or radians. If we're talking about degrees, then a full
circle, by convention is 360 degrees. A half circle then would be 180 degrees. And if I
wanted to do say, a third of a circle, that would be a third of 360 degrees or 120 degrees.
If we're using radians instead, then going all the way around the circle is called two
pi radians. The two pi was chosen because that's the circumference of a circle with
a radius of one, a half circle is then half of two pi radians, which is pi radians. And
if I wanted to do say, a quarter of a circle, that would be a quarter of my two pi radians,
a quarter of two pi is pi over two. To convert between degrees and radians is handed to us
the fact that 180 degrees corresponds to pi radians. Both of these represent half of a
circle. Let's convert negative 135 degrees to radians. Now, you might be wondering, what
does a negative angle even mean? Well, by convention, if we go in the counterclockwise
direction, that's considered a positive angle. And if we go in the clockwise direction, that's
considered a negative angle. To convert negative 135 degrees to radians, I could multiply by
pi radians per 180 degrees. Notice that the degrees cancel here, and I end up with negative
135 pi over 180 radians. That simplifies to negative three Pi over four radians. Or if
I convert pi to a decimal, that's negative 2.3562 radians, up to four decimal places.
But usually, if the answer is a simple fraction times pi, it's better to leave it in that
form. Rather than convert it to a decimal. I can also go the other direction and convert
radians to degrees, five pi over four radians. Now again, I we need to use the fact that
pi radians is 180 degrees. But if I write it like this, with radians on the top and
degrees on the bottom, then the radians won't cancel. So that doesn't work. Instead, so
instead, I need to find by the 180 degrees over hi radians, so they got cancel the radians
that way left radio cancel, and I get five pi times 180 over four pi degrees. Now the
PI's also cancel, and this simplifies to 225 degrees. Converting seven radians to degrees
is similar, I need to multiply by 180 degrees over pi radians. If I work out seven times
180 over pi on my calculator, I get 401 point O seven degrees up to two decimal places.
Notice that my answer a little more than 400 is more than 360 degrees, so this is more
than a full circle. That makes sense since seven radians is more than two pi radians.
Since pi is itself a little more than three. Sometimes angles are given in terms of degrees,
minutes and seconds, as in 32 degrees, 17 minutes, and 25 seconds. A minute is defined
as 1/60 of a degree. A second is defined as 1/60 of a minute, but since a minute is itself
1/60 of a degree This is 1/60 of 1/60 of a degree, or one over 3600 of a degree. You
can also think of this by saying that they're 60 minutes in one degree and they're 3600
seconds in one degree. Let's convert this number of degrees minutes and seconds to a
decimal number of degrees. We know that we have 32 degrees plus 17 minutes plus 25 seconds.
I'm going to copy down the 32 degrees, but I need to convert the minutes to degrees.
I know that there's 60 minutes in one degree If I want the unit's to cancel, I better put
the degrees on the top, so one degree corresponds to 60 minutes. Similarly, if I want to convert
seconds to degrees 25 seconds, I know that there are 3600 seconds in one degree, I want
the degrees to end up on the top, and I want the seconds on the bottom to cancel with a
25 seconds. So I need to write it this way. Okay, now I can write this as 32 degrees plus
17 over 60 degrees plus 25 over 3600 degrees. And because the minutes cancelled, and the
seconds cancelled, if I add this all up on my calculator, I get 32.2903 degrees up to
four decimal places, I can also go the other direction, and convert a decimal number of
degrees into degrees, minutes and seconds. I'm starting out with 247 degrees plus a decimal
number of degrees leftover. If I want to convert 0.3486 degrees, two minutes, well, I know
that I have 60 minutes in one degree, this time, I want the minutes on the top and the
degrees on the bottom, so that my degrees will cancel. So I just multiply my decimal
by 60. And I end up with 20.916 minutes. Let me copy this down. And now I'm going to take
the 0.916 minutes and convert those two seconds. So I know that they're 60 seconds in one minute.
So canceling my units again, I just multiply by 60, which gives me 54.96 minutes, I can
copy this down as is. Or I can round off my seconds and get 247 degrees, 20 minutes, and
55 seconds. converting between different ways of measuring angles is all about unit conversion.
To convert between radians and degrees, we use the fact that pi radians corresponds to
180 degrees. To convert between minutes and seconds and degrees, we use the fact that
60 minutes corresponds to one degree, and 60 seconds corresponds to one minute. If you
have a circle, a piece of the circumference is called an arc. And a wedge of pi for that
circle is called a sector. This video explains how to calculate the length of the arc and
the area of the sector in terms of the angle and the radius of the circle. the circumference
of a circle is given by the formula, the circumference equals two pi times the radius. Let's use
that to solve the following problem. A circular pool has a radius of eight meters, find the
arc length spanned by a central angle of 2.5 radians. So this angle from the center of
the circle is supposed to be 2.5 radians. I've drawn the angle is a little bit less
than half the circle because half the circle would be pi radians, which is 3.141 radians.
So I want to find the length of this arc. I know that the total circumference is going
to be two pi times eight meters. But I just want a fraction of the circumference. The
arc length I want is going to be given by the fraction of the circle that the angle
makes times the circumference of the circle. The fraction of the circle that I want is
given by the ratio of 2.5 radians over the total number of radians in the circle, which
is two pi radians. Multiply that by there's a conference, which we said was two pi times
eight meters. Notice that the two PI's cancel, and I'm left with just 2.5 times eight meters,
which is 10 meters. In general, the arc length is related to the angle it spans by considering
the arc length to be the fraction of the circle you get by taking the angle over The total
angle the circle of two pi times the circumference, which is two pi r. Since the two PI's cancel
as they did in our example, that means that arc length is given by theta times r. here,
R is the radius of the circle, and theta is the angle, it's important to note that theta
needs to be measured in radians, not degrees for this to work. That's because when I took
this ratio, I was using two pi radians for the total measure of the circle. So it's important
that theta also be in radians. The area of a circle is given by the formula, pi r squared,
where r is the radius, let's use that fact to find the area of the sector of a circle
of radius 10 meters. that spans an angle of pi over six radians, we know that the total
area of the circle is given by pi times 10 meters squared, or 100 pi meter squared. But
we just want a fraction of that area to give us the area of our sector. So we want to take
the fraction of the circle that the sector makes times the area of the circle. Well,
the fraction of the circle is given by the angle of pi over six over the total angle
in the whole circle of two pi. And well times that by the 100 pi meter squared, that simplifies
to 100 pi over 12 meters squared, or 25 thirds pi meter squared as a decimal, that's 26.18
meter squared up to two decimal places. In general, if you want to find the area of a
sector, you can take the fraction of the circle that the sector spans out times the area of
the circle, pi r squared. Notice that the fraction of the circle is given by the angle
that the sector makes in radians, divided by the two pi radians in the circle. Since
the PI's cancel, we can simplify this formula by saying the area is given by theta over
two times r squared, where theta is the angle of the sector in radians. Again, it's important
that this angle be in radians, since that's how we're doing our fraction of our circle
comparison. As usual, r represents the radius of the circle. Notice that if you don't have
your angle in radians, if it's in degrees instead, not a big deal, because we can always
convert from degrees to radians first, before using our formula. In this video, we saw that
for our sector of angle theta, given in radians, the arc length is given by the formula theta
times R. And the area of the sector is given by theta over two times r squared, where r
is the radius of the circle. This video defines linear and radial speed for a rotating circle,
and explains how to convert between them. Consider a spinning wheel. The angular speed
is the angle it goes through in a unit of time, I can write that as angle per time,
the units will be something like radians per second if the angle is measured in radians,
and the time is measured in seconds, or I guess we could do degrees per minute, etc.
The linear speed is the speed of a point on the rim of the wheel. So that is the distance
a point on the rim of the wheel travel travels in a unit of time. I can think of that as
distance per time. And so it has units of something like meters per second for example,
or it could be feet per minute, etc. Suppose we have a ferris wheel with radius 20 meters.
That's making one revolution every two minutes, we want to find its angular speed and the
linear speed of a point on its rim. Now the Ferris wheel is going one revolution every
two minutes. So that's one half revolution per minute, I want to, I want to find the
angular speed, which is the angle it goes through in a unit of time. I've already got
a unit of time in the denominator minutes, but I've got to somehow convert revolutions
to angle. So my angular speed, one half revolutions per minute, one revolution, but that on the
bottom, so the units will cancel out. One revolution is going through an angle of two
pi radians. That means my angular speed is going to be one half times two pi radians
per minute, or pi radians per minute. The linear speed, the speed of a point on the
rim, well, the wheel is going pi radians per minute, I got to somehow convert radians into
distance. So I know that when I go to pi radians, so that's all the way around the circle, I'm
going all the way around the circumference and distance, so that would be two pi times
the radius, or two pi times 20 meters. The two PI's cancel as do the radians, and I'm
left with 20 pi meters per minute. Let's review how we got from angular speed to linear speed
in order to get a more general formula. I'll call the angular speed, omega looks like a
W, I'll call the linear speed v. In the previous problem, we found the linear speed v, by starting
with the angular speed omega, and multiplying it by the circumference divided by two pi.
That's because the point on the rim travels the whole circumference as it goes through
an angle of two pi all the way around the circle. So I'll write that down here, circumference
over two pi. But since I know that my circumference is given by the formula two pi r, and the
two PI's cancel, as they did in the previous problem, that shows that the linear speed
is the angular speed times r, where r is the radius of the circle. In this video, we defined
linear speed and radial speed, and found that linear speed was radial speed times the radius
of the circle. This video introduces the trig functions, sine, cosine, tangent, secant,
cosecant, and cotangent. For right triangles. For a right triangle, with sides of length
A, B, and C angle theta as drawn, we define sine of theta as the length of the opposite
side over the hypothesis, the side that's opposite to our angle theta has measure a
and I have partners is this side here with measure C. So that would be a oversee for
this triangle. Cosine of theta is defined as the length of the adjacent side, over the
length of hi partners. This side here is the side adjacent to theta. Of course, the hypothesis
is also adjacent to theta, but it's special as a partner, so we don't think of it as the
adjacent side. So that would be B oversea. tangent of theta is the opposite side length
over the adjacent side length, so that would be a over b. The pneumonic to remember this
is so toa, that's sine is opposite over hypotenuse. Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse. And tangent
is opposite over adjacent. In fact, there's a relationship between tangent and sine and
cosine. Namely, tangent of theta is equal to sine of theta over cosine of theta. If
you want to see why that's that's because some of theta over cosine of theta is given
by a sine, which is opposite over hypothesis, divided by cosine, which is adjacent over
hypotenuse. If we compute these fractions by flipping and multiplying, the high partners,
length cancels, and we just get opposite over adjacent, which is, by definition, tangent
of theta. There are three more trig functions that are defined in terms of sine, cosine
and tangent. First of all, their sequence of theta, by definition, that's one over cosine
of theta. So it's going to be one over the adjacent over the partners, which is the high
partners over the adjacent, which in this triangle is C over B. cosecant of theta is
defined as one over sine theta. So that's one over the opposite over the hypotenuse,
which is the hypothesis over the opposite. And for this triangle, that's going to be
C over a. Finally, cotangent of theta is defined as one over tan theta. So that's going to
be one over opposite over adjacent, flip and multiply, I get adjacent over opposite, which
in this case is b over a. So notice that the values for cotangent cosecant and secant are
the reciprocals of the values for tangent, sine and cosine, respectively. Let's use these
definitions to find the exact values of all six trig functions for the angle theta in
this triangle. I'll start with a sine of theta. That's the opposite of our hypothesis. Well,
for this angle theta, the opposite side is down here and has measured to the high partners
has measured five, sine theta is two over five. Cosine theta is adjacent over hypotenuse,
but I don't know the value of the side length. But fortunately, I can find it using Bagaran
theorem says I have a right triangle here, I know that a squared, I'll call the side
length A plus B squared, where b is this other leg of the triangle is equal to c squared,
where c is the hypothesis. So here I have a squared plus two squared equals five squared,
which means that a squared plus four equals 25. A squared is 21. So A is plus or minus
the square root of 21. But since I'm talking about the length of a side of a triangle,
I can just use the positive answer. Returning to my computation of cosine theta, I can write
it as adjacent, which is the square root of 21. Over high partners, which is five, tangent
theta is the opposite over the adjacent, so that's going to be two over the square root
of 21. To compute secant of theta, that's one over cosine theta, so that's going to
be one over square root of 21 over five, which is five over the square root of 21. The reciprocal
of my cosine value. cosecant theta is one over sine theta, that's going to be the reciprocal
of my sine, so five halves, and cotangent theta is one over tan theta, so it's going
to be the reciprocal of my 10 value square root of 21. Over to finally, we'll do an application.
So if we have a kite that's flying at an angle of elevation as the angle from the horizontal
of 75 degrees, with a kite length string of 100 meters, we want to find out how high it
is I'll call the height Why? Well, we want to relate the known quantities this angle,
and this hypothesis, to the unknown quantity, the unknown quantity is the opposite side
of our triangle. So if we use sine of theta equals opposite of our hypothesis, then we
can relate these known amounts sine of 75 degrees to our unknown amount y, which is
the opposite and our note amount of 100 meters. solving for y This gives that y is 100 meters
times sine of 75 degrees. We can use a calculator to compute sine of 75 degrees. Be sure Use
degree mode and not radian mode when you type in the 75. When I do the computation, I get
a final answer of 96.59 meters up to two decimal places. Notice that we're ignoring the height
of the person in this problem. To remember the definitions of the trig functions, you
can use the pneumonic, so tau, and the fact that secant is the reciprocal of cosine cosecant
the reciprocal of sine and cotangent the reciprocal of tangent. In this video, I'll use geometry
to compute the sine and cosine of a 30 degree angle, a 45 degree angle and a 60 degree angle.
One way to compute the sine of a 45 degree angle is to use a right triangle with a 45
degree angle. This particular right triangle has I have hotness of length one. Since all
the angles of the triangle have to add up to 180 degrees, and we already have 90 degrees
and 45 degrees, the remaining angle must also be 45 degrees. So we have an isosceles triangle
with two sides the same length, I'll call that side length a. If we want sine of 45
degrees, let's use this 45 degree angle here, then sine is opposite over hypotenuse. So
if I can figure out how long this side length is, I'll be able to compute sine of 45 degrees.
Now the Pythagorean theorem says this side length squared plus that side length squared
equals I have hot news squared. So we have that a squared plus a squared equals one squared.
Alright, that is two A squared equals one. So a squared is one half, and a is plus or
minus the square root of one half. Since we're talking about the length of sides of triangles,
I can just use the positive square root it's customary to rewrite this as the square root
of one over the square root of two, which is one over the square root of two, and then
rationalize the denominator by multiplying the top and the bottom by the square root
of two. That gives me square root of two in the numerator, and the square root of two
squared in the denominator, which is the square root of two over two. So the side lengths
are the square root of two over two. Now I can figure out the sine of 45 degrees, by
computing the opposite over the hypotenuse. That's, I'm looking at this angle. So opposite
is square root of two over two hypothesis one. So the sine of 45 degrees is the square
root of two over two. Cosine of 45 degrees is adjacent over hypotenuse. That's this side
length over this hypothesis. So that's the square root of two over to over one again,
what would happen if instead of using this triangle with hypotony is one, we use this
triangle, also a 4545 90 triangle, but with hypotony is five, not quite drawn to scale.
Please pause the video for a moment and repeat the computation with this triangle. This time,
I'll call the side length B. Pythagorean Theorem tells me b squared plus b squared equals five
squared. So two, b squared equals 25. And b squared equals 25 over two, B is going to
be the plus or minus the square root of 25 over two, again, I can just use the positive
version. And so B is the square root of 25 over the square root of two, which is five
over the square root of two, rationalizing the denominator, I get five root two over
two. Now sign of my 45 degree angle is opposite over her partners, which is five square root
of two over two divided by five. That simplifies to the square root of two over two as before,
and a similar computation shows that cosine of 45 degrees is also square root of two over
two as before. This makes sense, because sine and cosine are based on ratios of sides. And
since these two triangles are similar triangles, they'll have the same ratios of sides. To
find the sine and cosine of 30 degrees, let's use this 30 6090 right triangle with hypotony
is one. If we double the triangle, we get an angle of 30 here, so a total angle of 60
degrees here, and this angle is also 60 degrees. So we have a 60 6060 triangle. That's an equilateral
triangle. All side length the same. Since this side length has length one, this side
length is also one. This entire side length is one, which means this short side of our
original triangle has length one half. Going back to my original triangle, let's use the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of his longer side x. Pythagorean theorem says
x squared plus one half squared equals one squared. So x squared plus a fourth equals
1x squared is three fourths. And so x is plus or minus the square root of three fourths
is the positive version and get the square root of three over the square root of four,
which is the square root of three over two. Now using our original triangle, again, let's
compute the sine of this 30 degree angle here. We know that sine of 30 degrees is opposite
of our hypothesis. The opposite of this angle is one half and the hypothesis is one. So
we get a sine of one half over one, which is one half cosine of 30 degrees is adjacent
over hypotenuse. So that's the square root of three over two divided by one. To find
sine of 60 degrees and cosine of 60 degrees, we can actually use the same green triangle
and just focus on this upper corner angle of 60 degrees instead. So sine of 60 degrees.
Opposite overhype hotness, but this time the opposite to this angle is the square root
of three over two. Cosine of 60 degrees adjacent over hypotenuse gives us one half. I'll summarize
the results in this table below. Notice that a 30 degree angle corresponds to pi over six
radians since 30 degrees times pi over 180 is pi over six. Similarly, 45 degrees corresponds
to pi over four radians and 60 degrees corresponds to pi over three radians. I recommend that
you memorize the three numbers one half, root two over two, and root three over two. And
the fact that one half and root three over two go together. And root two over two goes
with itself. From that information, it's not hard to reconstruct the triangles, you know
that a 4545 90 triangle is an isosceles triangle, so it must have the side links where the same
number goes with itself. And a 30 6090 triangle has one side length smaller than the other.
So the smaller side must be one half and the larger side must be root three over two since
root three is bigger than one and so root three over two is bigger than one half. Doing
a visual check, you can easily fill in the angles, the smaller angle must be the 30 degree
angle, and the larger one must be the 60 degree one. In this video, we computed the sine and
cosine of three special angles 30 degrees, 45 degrees, and 60 degrees. This video defined
sine and cosine in terms of points on the unit circle, a unit circle is a circle with
radius one. Up to now we defined sine and cosine and tangent in terms of right triangles.
For example, to find sine of 14 degrees in theory, you could draw a right triangle with
an angle of 14 degrees and then calculate the sign as the length of the opposite side
over the length of by partners. But if we use this method to try to compute sine of
120 degrees, things go horribly wrong. When we draw this 120 degree angle, and this right
angle, there's no way to complete this picture to get a right triangle. So instead, we're
going to use a unit circle that is a circle of radius one. The figure below illustrates
how right triangles and a unit circle are related. If you draw right triangles with
larger of hypotenuse one with larger and larger angles, then the top vertex sweeps out part
of a unit circle. Let's look at this relationship in more detail. In this figure, I've drawn
a right triangle inside a unit circle. The hypothesis of the triangle is the radius of
the circle, which is one, one vertex of the right triangle is at the origin. And another
vertex of the right triangle is at the edge of the circle, I'm going to call the coordinates
of that vertex A, B. Now the base of this right triangle has length a, the x coordinate,
and the height of the right triangle is B, the y coordinate. If I use the right triangle
definition of sine and cosine of theta, this right here is the angle theta, then cosine
of theta is adjacent over hypotenuse, so that's a over one, or a. Notice that a also represents
the x coordinate of this point on the unit circle, at angle theta from the x axis, I'll
write that down. For a sine of theta, if I use the right triangle definition, that's
opposite overhead partners. So b over one, which is just B. But B also represents the
y coordinate of this point in the on the unit circle at angle theta. For tangent theta,
if we use the right side triangle definition, its opposite over adjacent. So that's B over
A, I can think of that as the y coordinate of the point over the x coordinate of the
point. Now for angles theta, that can't be part of a right triangle, because they're
too big, they're bigger than 90 degrees, like now I'll call this angle here theta, I can
still use this idea of x and y coordinates to calculate the sine and cosine of theta.
So if I just mark this point, on the end of this line at angle theta, if I mark that to
have coordinates x and y, then cosine theta, I'm still going to define as the x coordinate
of this point, sine theta as the y coordinate, and tangent theta as the ratio of the y coordinate
over the x coordinate. When we use this unit circle definition, we always draw theta starting
from the positive x axis and going counterclockwise. Let's use this unit circle definition to calculate
sine, cosine and tangent of this angle fee. In our figure, we have a unit circle. And
these numbers are supposed to represent the x&y coordinates of this point on the unit
circle at the endpoint of this line segment, that lies at angle fee for the positive x
axis sign fee is equal to the y coordinate cosine fee is equal to the x coordinate. And
tangent of fee is given by the ratio of the two, which works out to negative 0.3639 up
to four decimal places. This video gives a method for calculating sine cosine and tangent
in terms of the unit circle. Starting from the positive x axis, you draw the angle theta
going counterclockwise. You look at the coordinates of the point on the unit circle where that
angle ends. And cosine of that angle theta is the x coordinate, sine of theta is the
y coordinate, and tangent of theta is the ratio. This video gives three properties of
the trig function sine and cosine, that can be deduced from the unit circle definition.
Recall that the unit circle definition of sine and cosine for an angle theta is that
cosine theta is the x coordinate. And sine of theta is the y coordinate for the point
on the unit circle at angle theta. The first property is what I call the periodic property.
This says that the values of cosine and sine are periodic with period two pi. And what
that means is that if you take cosine of an angle plus two pi, you get the same thing
as just if you took cosine of the angle So, when we write this down, we're assuming that
theta is measured in radians. If we want to measure theta in degrees, the similar statement
is that cosine of theta plus 360 degrees is equal to cosine of theta, we can make the
same statements for sine, sine of an angle plus two pi is equal to sine of the original
angle. Here, the angle being measured in radians. If we want to measure the angle in degrees,
the statement is that sine of theta plus 360 is equal to sine of theta, we can see why
this is true from the unit circle definition of sine and cosine. This is our angle theta,
then theta plus two pi, the plus two pi adds a full turn around the unit circle to our
angles, so we end up at the same place, theta and theta plus two pi are just two different
names for the same location on the unit circle. And since sine and cosine give you the y and
x coordinates of that point on the circle, they have to have the same value. Similarly,
if we consider an angle theta, and an angle theta minus two pi, the minus two pi means
we go the other direction around the unit circle clockwise, we still end up in the same
place. And therefore, cosine of theta minus two pi, the x coordinate of that position
is the same thing as cosine of theta, sine of theta minus two pi is the same thing as
sine of theta, the same statements hold if we add or subtract multiples of two pi. For
example, cosine of theta plus four pi is still the same thing as cosine of theta, this time,
we've just gone to turns around the unit circle and still gotten back to the same place. So
if we want to find cosine of five Pi, that's the same thing as cosine of pi plus four pi,
which is the same thing as cosine of pi. Thinking about the unit circle, pi is halfway around
the unit circle. So cosine of pi means the x coordinate of this point right here. Well,
that point has coordinates negative one, zero, so cosine of pi must be negative one. If I
want to take sine of negative 420 degrees, well, that's sine of negative 360 degrees,
minus 60 degrees, which is the same thing as sine of minus 60 degrees. Thinking about
the unit circle, minus 60 degrees, means I start at the positive x axis and go clockwise
by 60 degrees that lands me about right here. And so that's one of the special angles that
has an x coordinate of one half a y coordinate of negative root three over two. And therefore
sine of negative 60 is negative root three over two the y coordinate. The next property
I call the even odd property, it says that cosine is an even function, which means that
cosine of negative theta is the same thing as cosine of theta, while sine is an odd function,
which means that sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta. To see why
this is true, let's look at an angle theta. And the angle negative theta. A negative angle
means you go in the clockwise instead of counterclockwise direction from the positive x axis. The coordinates
of this point by definition, r cosine theta sine theta, whereas the coordinates of this
point are cosine of negative theta, sine of negative theta. But by symmetry, these two
points have the exact same x coordinate, and therefore cosine of theta must equal cosine
of negative theta, while their y coordinates have the same magnitude, but opposite signs.
This one's positive and this one's negative. Therefore, sine of negative theta is the negative
of sine of theta. Let's figure out if tan of theta isn't even or odd function. Well,
we know that 10 of negative theta tangent by definition, is sine over cosine. Well,
we know that sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta, whereas cosine
of negative theta is cosine of theta. Therefore We're getting negative sine theta over cosine
theta, which is negative tan of theta. Since tan of negative theta is the negative of tan
of theta, tan theta is an odd function. The last property on this video is the Pythagorean
property, which says that cosine of theta squared plus sine of theta squared is equal
to one. A lot of times this property is written with this shorthand notation, cosine squared
theta plus sine squared theta equals one. But this notation, cosine squared theta just
means you take cosine of theta and square it. This property is called the Pythagorean
property, because it comes from the Pythagorean Theorem. Let me draw a right triangle on the
unit circle. I'll call this angle theta. So the coordinates of this endpoint here are
cosine theta sine theta. Since this is supposed to be a unit circle, the hypothesis of my
right triangle has length one, the base of my right triangle is just cosine theta, same
thing as the x coordinate of this point. And the height of my triangle is the y coordinate
of the point sine theta. Now the Pythagorean theorem says that this side length squared
plus that side of that squared equals one squared. Since one squared is the same thing
as one, that gives me the Pythagorean property. But the green property is handy for computing
values of cosine given values of sine and vice versa. And this problem, we're told that
sine of t is negative two sevenths. And T is an angle that lies in quadrant three. When
we say the angle lies in quadrant three, that means the terminal side of the angle lies
here in quadrant three. One way to find cosine of t is to use the fact that cosine squared
t plus sine squared t is equal to one. That is cosine of t squared plus negative 2/7 squared
is equal to one, I can write this as cosine of t squared plus 4/49 is equal to one. And
so cosine of t squared is equal to one minus 4/49, which is 4540 nights. taking the square
root of both sides, that goes for the cosine t is plus or minus the square root of 45 over
49, that's plus or minus the square root of 45 over seven. Now, since we're in the third
quadrant, we know that cosine of t, which represents the x coordinate of this point,
must also be negative. Therefore, cosine of t is going to be negative square root of 45
over seven. It's also possible to solve this problem using the Pythagorean theorem for
right triangles directly. If we look at the fact that sine of t is negative two sevens
and ignore the negative sign for now, we can think of this information as telling us that
we have a right triangle, angle theta, whose opposite side is to and whose high partners
is seven. We call this side here a them but Tiger in theorem says us a squared plus two
squared is seven squared. So a squared plus four is 49. So a squared is 45. And a is plus
or minus the square root of 45. Since I'm worrying about a triangle, I'm going to use
the positive value. Now, cosine of t is going to be adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's
going to be the square root of 45 over seven. Now I go back to thinking about positive and
negative signs. And I noticed that since I'm in the third quadrant, my co sign needs to
be negative, so I just stick a negative sign in front. This alternative solution uses many
of the same ideas as the previous solution, and ultimately gets us the same answer. This
video gives three properties of trig functions, the periodic property, the even odd property,
and the Pythagorean property. This video is about the graphs of sine and cosine. I want
to graph the functions y equals cosine t and y equals sine t, where t is in radians. I'm
going to think of this being the t axis, and this being the y axis. One way to do this
is to plot points. So I'll fill in this chart, using my knowledge of special angles on the
unit circle. These points will be easier to graph, if I convert them all to decimals.
Now a plot the points for cosine and connect the dots to get a graph of y equals cosine
t from t equals zero to t equals two pi. To continue the graph for t values less than
zero or bigger than two pi, I could plot more points. Or I could just use the fact that
the cosine values repeat. If I add or subtract two pi to the my angle T, I'll be at the same
place on the unit circle. So my cosine will be exactly the same. Therefore, my values
of cosine, which are represented by my y values on this graph, repeat themselves. For example,
when my T value is two pi plus pi over six about like here, it's cosine is the same as
the cosine of just pi over six. So I'll take this dot here and repeat it over here. Similarly,
the when t is like two pi plus pi over four, I get the same value of cosine is when it's
just pi over four. So this.is going to repeat, and I can continue repeating all my dots.
This one repeats over here at two pi plus, say pi over three. And so my whole graph will
repeat something like this. It also repeats on this side, something like this. Since subtracting
two pi from my t values will also give me the same value of cosine. We can also plot
points to get a graph for sine and extend it by repetition. Going forward, I'll usually
write the function sine and cosine as y equals cosine of x and y equals sine of x. When I
read it this way, notice that x now refers to an angle, while y refers to a value of
cosine, or sine. That's a different meaning of x and y, compared to when we're talking
about the unit circle, where x refers to the cosine value, and y refers to the sine value.
Now let's look at some properties of the graphs of sine and cosine. The first thing you might
notice is that the graph of cosine and the graph of sine are super similar to each other.
In fact, you can think of the graph of cosine as just being the graph of sine shifted to
the left by pi over two. So we can write cosine of x as the sine function of x plus pi over
two, since adding pi over two on the inside, move the graph horizontally to the left by
pi over two. Or we can think of the graph of sine as being constructed from the graph
of cosine by shifting the cosine graph right by pi over two, that means we can write sine
of x as equal to cosine of x minus pi over two, since subtracting pi over two on the
inside, shifts the cosine graph to the right by pi over two. Next, let's look at domain
and range. The domain of sine and cosine is all real numbers. Alright, that is negative
infinity to infinity, but the range is just from negative one to one. That makes sense,
because sine and cosine come from the unit circle. The input values for the domain come
from angles. And you can use any numbers and angle positive negative as big as you want,
just by wrapping a lot of times around the circle, the output values for the range, that
is the actual values of sine and cosine come from the coordinates on the unit circle. And
those coordinates can't be any bigger than one or any smaller than negative one. So that
gives us a range. As far as even an odd behavior, you can tell from the graph, here's cosine,
that it's symmetric with respect to the y axis, and so it must be even. Whereas the
graph of sine is symmetric with respect to the origin and must be odd. The absolute maximum
values of these two functions is one and the absolute minimum value is negative one. We
can also use the words midline amplitude and period to describe these two functions. The
midline is the horizontal line, halfway in between the maximum and minimum points. Here
the mid line is y equals zero. The amplitude is the vertical distance between a maximum
point and the midline. You can also think of the amplitude as the vertical distance
between a minimum point and the midline, or as half the vertical distance between a min
point and a max point. For the cosine function and the sine function, the amplitude is one.
A periodic function is a function that repeats at regular horizontal intervals, the horizontal
length of the smallest repeating unit is called the period. For y equals cosine of x, the
period is two pi. Notice that the period is the horizontal distance between successive
peaks, or maximum points, or between successive troughs, or minimum points. algebraically,
we can write cosine of x plus two pi equals cosine of x and sine of x plus two pi equals
sine of x to indicate that the functions repeat themselves over an interval of two pi and
have a period of two pi. In this video, we graphed y equals cosine of x and y equals
sine of x. and observe that they both have a midline at y equals zero, an amplitude of
one and a period of two pi. Sine you sort of functions are functions that are related
to sine and cosine by transformations like stretching and shrinking and shifting. This
video is about graphing these functions. Let's start by graphing the function y equals three
sine of 2x. This function is related to the function y equals sine x. So I'll graph that
first. Now, the three on the outside stretches this graph vertically by a factor of three,
while the two on the inside compresses that horizontally by a factor of one half. If instead
I want to graph y equals three sine 2x plus one, this plus one on the outside shifts everything
up by one unit. Let's compare the midline amplitude and period of our original y equals
sine x are transformed y equals three sine 2x, and are further transformed y equals three
sine 2x plus one, the original sign has a midline at y equals zero, an amplitude of
one and a period of two pi. For the transformed function, y equals three times sine of 2x.
The two on the inside shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half. So it changes the
period of two pi into a period of one half times two pi, which just pi. Since the two
on the inside only affects x values and horizontal distances, it doesn't affect the midline,
which is a y value, or the amplitude, which is a vertical distance. But the three on the
outside does affect these things. Well, in particular, it affects the amplitude, since
everything is stretched out vertically by a factor of three, the amplitude of one get
stretch to an amplitude of three. In this case, the midline doesn't actually change,
because multiplying a y value of zero by three is still a y value of zero. Now on the third
function, we've taken the second function and added one on the outside, so that shifts
everything up by one. Therefore, instead of having a midline at y equals zero, we now
have a midline at y equals one, the amplitude doesn't change though, it's still three, because
shifting everything up by one doesn't affect the distance between the mid mine and the
end the maximum point. Also, the period is still pi since the period is a horizontal
measure, and adding one on the outside only affects vertical things. Next, let's graph
the function y equals three times sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four. This
function is very closely related to the first function we graphed on the previous page,
that was y equals three sine of 2x. In fact, if we give the name f of x to that function,
and maybe we can call g of x, this other function, then we can get g of x by taking f of x and
plugging in x minus pi is pi over four in for x. In other words, g of x is f of x minus
pi over four. This relationship gives mean idea for graphing g of x the function we want
to graph, we can first graph f of x, we already did that on the previous page. And then we
can shift its graph to the right by pi over four, because that's what you do when you
subtract a number on the inside of a function. So here's the graph of y equals three sine
2x. Recall that it's just the graph of sine stretched vertically by a factor of three,
and shrunk horizontally by a factor of one half. Now, to graph the function that I want,
I'm going to shift this graph over by pi over four to the right. Notice that since I had
my function written in factored form, I could just read off the horizontal shift. But if
I had written it instead, as y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two, which is algebraically
equivalent, it would be easy to get confused and think that I needed to shift over by pi
over two. So it's best to factor first, before figuring out what the shift is, we're factoring
out the coefficient of x. If instead, we wanted to graph this function, same as the one we
just graphed, it's just with a minus one on the outside, that minus one would just bring
everything down by one. Let's take a moment to look at midline amplitude, and period for
the original parent function, y equals sine of x, and our final transformed function,
y equals three sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four minus one, our original
sine function has midline at y equals zero amplitude of one and period of two pi. For
our transform function, the three on the outside stretches vertically, so it makes the amplitude
three, the minus one on the outside shifts everything down by one. So it brings the midline,
y equals zero, down to Y equals negative one, the two on the inside, shrinks everything
horizontally by a factor of one half. So the period becomes one half times two pi, which
is pi. Finally, there's a horizontal shift going on, are transferring function shifts
to the right, by pi over four, this horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift.
The function we just analyzed was y equals three sine 2x minus pi over four minus one,
which could also be written as y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two minus one. This
is a function of the form y equals a sine B x minus c plus d, where b is positive. If
we have a function of this form, or the similar function with cosine in it, then we know that
the midline is going to be at y equals D. That's because the original midline of sine
or cosine at y equals zero gets shifted up by D, we know that the amplitude is going
to be a because this A multiplied on the outside stretches everything vertically by a factor
of a to be a little more accurate, we should say the amplitude is the absolute value of
A in case a is negative. If a is negative, then that amounts to a vertical reflection,
or a reflection over the x axis. We know that the period of the original sine or cosine
is two pi. And we know that this factor of B amounts to a horizontal shrink by a factor
of one over B, or I guess it could be a horizontal stretch by a factor of one over b if b is
less than one. So because we're starting with a period of two pi, and we're multiplying
by one over B, our new period is going to be two Pi over B. The trickiest thing is the
horizontal shift. And to get that right, I like to factor out this be from my equation.
So instead of writing y equals a cosine bx minus c plus d, I'm going to write y equals
A cosine B times quantity x minus c over b plus d. Similarly, if it's a sine function,
I write y equals a sine B times x minus quantity c over b plus d, then I can read off the horizontal
shift as C over B. And that'll be a shift to the right, if C ever be as positive and
a shift to the left, if C over b is negative, this might seem backwards from what you're
used to. But it's because we have that minus sign there. So if C over B is positive, we're
actually subtracting on the inside. So that shifts right, if C of b over b is negative
minus a negative is actually adding something, and that's why it shifts it to the left. So
as one final example, say I wanted to graph y equals 1/3, cosine of one half x plus three
minus five, that would have a midline at y equals minus five, an amplitude of 1/3, a
period of two pi divided by one half, which is four pi, and a horizontal shift. But a
rewrite this horizontal shift of six units to the left, the horizontal shift is sometimes
called the phase shift. And that's all for graphs of sinusoidal functions. This video
is about graphing the trig functions, tangent, secant, cotangent and cosecant. To gain an
intuition for the graph of y equals tangent of x, I think it's handy to look at the slope
of a line at angle theta on the unit circle. The slope of this line is the rise over the
run. But the rise is given by sine of theta, and the run is given by cosine of theta. So
the slope is given by sine theta over cosine theta, which is simply tan of theta. So if
I want to graph y equals tan of x, I can think of x as being the angle and y as being the
slope of the line at that angle. Notice if the angle is zero, the slope is zero. But
as the angle increases towards pi over two, the slope gets bigger and bigger heading towards
infinity. As the angle goes from zero towards negative pi over two, the slope is getting
negative and heading towards negative infinity, at exactly pi over two and negative pi over
two, we have a vertical line. And so the slope is undefined. Using this information, let's
graph a rough sketch of y equals tan x. Remember, we're thinking of x as the angle and y as
the slope, we're going to go between an angle of negative pi over two and pi over two. So
we said that the slope was zero when the angles zero, and then it heads up towards positive
infinity, as we go towards the angle goes towards pi over two with an undefined value
at pi over two, it goes negative heading towards negative infinity as the angle heads towards
negative pi over two, also, with an undefined value at negative pi over two, you can also
verify that for angles slightly bigger than pi over two, we have the same line as for
angles that are approaching negative pi over two, and therefore this picture repeats. And
it turns out that tangent is periodic with period not to pi, like sine and cosine, but
just pi. The period of pi makes sense because if you take a line and rotate it by 180 degrees,
it's the same line with the same slope and therefore has the same value of tangent in
this graph of y equals 10x knows that the x intercepts all right values of x of the
form negative two pi negative pi Zero, pi, two pi, etc, you can write that as pi times
k, where k is an integer that is a positive or negative whole number or zero. This makes
a lot of sense because tangent of x is sine of x over cosine of x. And so you're gonna
get x intercepts, that's where y is zero, which is where the numerator is zero, and
sine x is zero, at values of the form pi, two pi, and so on. From the graph, you can
see the vertical asymptotes are at values like negative three pi over two, negative
pi over two, pi over two, and three pi over two, these values can be written as pi over
two times k, where k is an odd integer. Again, this makes sense from the definition of tangent,
since the vertical asymptotes will occur where the denominator is zero, and cosine x is zero,
at numbers, like negative pi over two pi over two, three pi over two, and so on, the domain
of tangent is the x axis for which it's defined. So that's going to be everything except for
the vertical asymptotes, we can write that as x such that x is not equal to pi over two
times k, for K, an odd integer. The range or the y values go all the way from negative
infinity to infinity. And the period, as we mentioned previously, is pi. Since the smallest
repeating unit has a horizontal width of pi, to graph y equals secant x, I'm going to remember
that secant is one over cosine. So if I start with a graph of cosine, I can take the reciprocal
of the y values to get the graph of secant, the reciprocal of one is one, the reciprocal
of zero is undefined, so I'm not going to have a value at pi over two, negative pi over
two, three pi over two, or negative three pi over two. When I take the reciprocal of
numbers, just less than one, I'm going to get numbers just greater than one, but I would
take the reciprocal of positive numbers getting close to zero, I'm going to get really big
positive numbers going up towards infinity. Similarly, on the other side, over here, I
have numbers close to zero, but negative, so their reciprocals will be negative numbers
heading towards negative infinity, the reciprocal of negative one is negative one. And similarly
here, so I'm getting kind of positive and negative buckets and upside down buckets as
the graph of my sequence. Notice that secant has a period of two pi, which makes sense,
since cosine has a period of two pi, it has a range that goes from negative infinity to
negative one inclusive, and from one to infinity. That makes sense because the range of cosine
is between one and negative one, and we're taking the reciprocal of those values. The
domain is everything except for the vertical asymptotes. Now the vertical asymptotes are
where cosine is zero. So that is at values of the form pi over two, three pi over two,
etc. That's values of the form pi over 2k, where k is an odd integer. So the domain is
going to be x values such that x is not equal to pi over 2k. For K and odd integer. The
x intercepts of secant Well, it doesn't have any, because you can't take one over something
and get the numbers zero for your y value. We've seen the graph of y equals tan x and
y equals secant x. This is the graph of y equals cotangent x. It looks similar to the
graph of tangent x, it's just a decreasing function instead of an increasing one, and
it has its vertical asymptotes and its x intercepts in different places. Finally, this green graph
is the graph of y equals cosecant x. It's related to the graph of sine x, since cosecant
is one over sine x. And in fact, if I draw the graph of sine x in between, you can see
how it kind of bounces off. Because it's the reciprocal. I encourage you to memorize the
general shape of these graphs, you can always figure out the details by thinking how about
how they're related to the graphs of cosine of x, and sine x. This video is about the
graphs of transformations of tangent, secant cotangent and cosecant. Before I graph this
fancy function, I'm going to graph the related parent function, y equals cosecant of x. Recall
that cosecant of x is one over sine of x. So the graph of cosecant of x has a vertical
asymptotes, where sine of x is zero, that puts the vertical asymptotes at pi, two pi,
zero, and so on. Because seeing n of x is one where sine is one. So here, and so it
looks something like this. Now, when I graph my fancy function, I know that the two on
the outside does a vertical stretch by two, the plus one shifts up by one, the PI means
everything shrinks horizontally by one over pi. And so the period, instead of being two
pi, like it is for cosecant, it's going to be two pi divided by pi, which is two. Finally,
this pi over two has to do with a horizontal shift. But in order to see by how much we
horizontal shift, we need to factor out the pie first. So if I rewrite my function, as
two times cosecant pi times x plus a half, plus one, I can see the horizontal shift is
one half to the left. Let me do those transformations in pieces. First, I'll do the vertical motions.
So I'll leave the horizontal axis as is I'll stretch by a factor of two. And now I'll shift
up by one. Next, I'll worry about the horizontal motion, instead of a period of two pi, I'm
going to have a period of two. But in addition, everything is going to be shifted left by
one half. So instead of having my vertical asymptotes at zero, pi, two pi and so on,
they would be at 012, and so on, except everything shifted over by one half. So that means the
vertical asymptotes will actually be at negative a half, a half, one and a half, and so on.
Another way to find the vertical asymptotes is by noting that cosecant is one over sine,
so therefore, cosecant pi x plus one half does not exist when a sine pi x plus one half
equals zero, ie when pi times x plus one half is equal to a multiple of pi. canceling the
PI's and solving for x, that's when x is some number minus a half. So those are exactly
the values of say, one half, three half, five halves, and so on that we've drawn. So once
we've got the vertical asymptotes in place, we can see that our graph fits in between
them. This purple piece got shrunk horizontally and shifted by a half, so it ends up hugging
the x axis. I'll draw it in right here. And all the other pieces also get shrunk horizontally
and shifted. So my final graph looks something like this. In this next problem, we're given
the graph and we need to find the equation, the shape of the graph. And the fact that
it's increasing tells us it must be a tangent graph. But y equals tan x by itself would
have a period of pi. Let's check what our graph has a period of need to find the horizontal
width of one complete cycle, it's probably easiest to measure if I sketch in the vertical
asymptotes, which seem to run from an x value of negative three to an x value of one. So
that's a horizontal distance of four. So our graph might be something more like tan of
Bx, where pi over B has to be four. That means that pi equals four B. And so B is pi over
four. So our graph is probably more closely related to Y equals tan of pi over 4x. But
if it were exactly y equals tan of pi over 4x, then that middle point right here would
be at the origin. And instead, that middle point is at negative one, one, that means
my tangent graph is shifted left by one, and up by one, the left by one, I can accomplish
by writing x plus one, when I have the Pi over four factored out the up by one I get
by writing a plus one on the outside. Now as possible, there might also be a vertical
stretch factor out front, an easy way to check for that is by plugging in x equals zero and
seeing whether what kind of number out in front I might need to get this y intercept
of two. So I'm going to write y equals a tan pi over four quantity x plus one plus one,
plug in point 02. So that's two equals a tan pi over four, zero plus one plus one. And
I can solve for A since tan of pi over four is just one, this equation simplifies to two
equals a times one plus one, which means that a has to be one. So in fact, this equation
here is our final answer for this graph. To summarize, if we have a function of the form
y equals a tan bx minus c plus d, the number a accomplishes a vertical stretch. The number
B changes the period from pi to pi over B, the number D shifts vertically by D. And finally,
to figure out what the number c is, we have to rewrite our equation in factored form factoring
out the B. And so we see that there's a phase shift right by C over B. The same things hold.
If instead of tangent, we have a graph of cotangent, we can say the same things for
our graph of secant and a graph of cosecant. The only thing to be careful of is that B
now changes the period from two pi to two pi over B, simply because the original period
of secant and cosecant is two pi, whereas the original period of tan and co tan is just
pi. If you know what the original graphs of tan, secant cotangent and cosecant look like,
you can use your knowledge of transformations to graph more complicated functions. This
video defines the standard inverse trig functions, sine inverse cosine inverse and tan inverse.
In this crazy looking graph, please focus first on the thin black line. This is a graph
of y equals sine x. The graph of the inverse of a function can be found by flipping the
graph of the original function over the line y equals x. I've drawn the flipped graph with
this blue dotted line. But you'll notice that the blue dotted line is not the graph of a
function because it violates the vertical line test. So in order to get a function,
that's the inverse of y equals sine x, we need to restrict the domain of sine of x.
We'll restrict it to this piece that's drawn with a thick black line. If I invert that
piece, by flipping it over the line y equals x, I get the piece drawn with a red dotted
line here. And that piece does satisfy the vertical line test. So it is in fact, a function
of the regular sine x has domain from negative infinity to infinity are restricted sine x
has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two. It's, its range is still from negative
one to one, just like the regular sine x. Because I've taken the biggest possible piece
of the graph, whose flipped version is still a function. The inverse sine function is often
written as arc sine of x. And since inverting a function reverses the roles of y at x, it
reverses the domain and the range. So arc sine of x, the inverse function has domain
from negative one to one, and range from negative pi over two to pi over two, which seems plausible
from the graph. Now an inverse function undoes the work a function. So if the function sine
takes angles theta, two numbers, x, then the inverse sine, or arc sine takes numbers x,
two angles theta. For example, since sine of pi over two is one, arc sine of one is
pi over two. And in general, the output of arc sine of x is the angle between negative
pi over two and pi over two whose side is x. y is equal to arc sine x means that x is
equal to sine of y. But since there are many angles, y who sine is x, right, they all differ
by multiples of two pi, we specify also, that y is between negative pi over two and pi over
two. That was the whole point of doing this domain restriction in order to get a well
defined inverse value. There's an alternate notation for inverse sine. Sometimes it's
written as sine to the negative one of x. But this notation can be confusing, so be
careful. In particular, sign to the negative one of x does not equal one over sine of x.
One over sine of x the reciprocal function is another word for cosecant of x. But sine
to the negative one of x is another word for arc sine of x, the inverse sine function,
which is not the same thing as the reciprocal function, let's go through the same process
to build an inverse cosine function, we start with a graph of cosine of x, we flip it over
the line y equals x to get the blue dotted line. But the blue dotted line is not a function.
So we go back and restrict the domain for our original cosine of x to just be between
zero and pi. The resulting red graph now satisfies the vertical line test. So it's a proper inverse
function. Our restricted cosine has domain from zero to pi, and range from negative one
to one. And so our inverse function, arc cosine has domain from negative one to one, and range
from zero to pi. Since cosine takes us from angles to numbers, arc cosine takes us from
numbers back to angles. For example, cosine of pi over four is the square root of two
over two. So arc cosine of the square root of two over two is equal to pi over four.
arc cosine of x is the angle between zero and pi, whose cosine is x. In other words,
y equals r cosine of x means that x is equal to cosine of y. And y is between zero and
pi, since otherwise, there'd be lots of possible answers for an angle y whose cosine is x.
The alternative notation for arc cosine is cosine inverse. And again, we have to be careful.
cosine to the negative 1x is not the same thing as one over cosine of x. one over cosine
of x is also called secant of x. cosine to the negative 1x means arc cosine On the inverse
function, and these two things are not the same. Finally, let's look take a look at inverse
tangent function. Here's a graph of tangent, and black. These vertical lines aren't really
part of the function there, just vertical asymptotes. So in order to get the actual
function, when we flip over the line y equals x, we take just one piece of the tangent function.
Here, we've taken the piece marked in black, we flip that over the line y equals x, we
get this piece in red, which is actually a function because it satisfies the vertical
line test. Now, you might ask, would it be possible to pick a different piece of the
tangent function to invert? And the answer is, yes, we could do that. And on another
planet, maybe mathematicians do that. But on our planet, we use the convention that
we pick this piece of tangent to invert, which is kind of a convenient choice since it's
centered here around the origin. In the previous two examples, our choice of restricted domain
for sine and for cosine was also a convention that led to a conveniently defined inverse
function. In any case, based on our choice, our restricted tan function has domain from
negative pi over two to pi over two. We don't include the endpoints in that interval, because
our restricted tan function has vertical asymptotes at negative pi over two and pi over two, so
it's not defined there. The range of our restricted tan function is from negative infinity to
infinity. Therefore, arc tan of X has domain from negative infinity to infinity, and range
from negative pi over two to pi over two. Once again, tangent is taking us from angles
to numbers. So arc tan is taking us from numbers to angles. For example, tangent of pi over
four is one, and therefore, arc tan of one is pi over four. So arc tan of x means the
angle between negative pi over two and pi over two whose tangent is x. y is equal to
arc tan x means that x is equal to tangent of y. And that y is between negative pi over
two and pi over two. The inverse tan function can also be written as 10 to the minus one
of x. And once again, tan inverse of x means the inverse trig function, arc tan of x. And
it's not equal to one over tan of x, which is called cotangent of x. And that's all for
this video on the three basic inverse trig functions. sine inverse x, also known as arc
sine of x, cosine inverse x, also known as arc cosine x, and tan inverse x, also known
as arc tan x. This video is an introduction to solving trig equations. Let's start with
the equation two cosine x plus one equals zero, I want to find all the solutions in
the interval from zero to two pi, and then get a general formula for all solutions, not
just those in that interval. Let me start by rewriting this equation to isolate the
tricky part, which is cosine of x. So I'm going to write two cosine x equals negative
one, and then divide both sides by two. Now I'm looking for the angles x between zero
and two pi whose cosine is negative one half. Since negative one half is one of the special
values on the unit circle, I can use my knowledge of the unit circle to see that the angle between
zero and two pi must be either two pi over three, or four pi over three. My answer needs
to include both of these values. There are no other spots on the unit circle whose cosine
is negative one half. But there are more angles because we can always take one of these angles
and add multiples of two pi to it. So if I want to Find all solutions, I can take these
two principles solutions, two pi over three, and four pi over three, and simply add multiples
of two pi to them, for example, two pi over three plus two pi, or two pi over three minus
two pi, two pi over three plus four pi, and so on. A much more efficient way to write
this is to write two pi over three plus two pi times k, any integer that is any positive
or negative whole number, or zero. Similarly, I can write four pi over three plus two pi
k, to capture all solutions, based on the principal solution for pi over three by adding
and subtracting multiples of two pi. This is my final solution. Next, let's look at
a trig equation involving tangent. As usual, I'm going to start out by cleaning things
up and isolating the tricky part, which in this case is tangent. So let me add tangent
to both sides. That'll give me three, tan x equals the square root of three. And so
tan x is the square root of three over three, the square root of three over three looks
suspiciously similar to value the value of square to three over two, which is a special
value on my unit circle. So my suspicion is that my unit circle will again, help me find
this value of x without a calculator. Recall that tan x is sine x over cosine x. So I'm
looking for angles on the unit circle between zero and two pi with a ratio of sine over
cosine will give me square root of three over three, I actually only need to look in the
first quadrant, and the third quadrant, because those are the quadrants where a tangent is
positive. And I really only need to look at angles whose either sine or cosine has a squared
of three in it. So by trial and error, I can see that tan pi over six, which is sine pi
over six over cosine pi over six, will give me one half over root three over two, that's
the same thing as one half times two over three, which is one over root three. If I
rationalize that, I get root three over three. So that value works. If I try tan of pi over
three, instead, I get root three, which is not equal to root three over three. So pi
over three doesn't work. Similarly, I can work out some the values in the third quadrant
and see that seven pi over six works. But four pi over three does not. So my answer
to part A includes just two values, pi over six, and seven pi over six. Now if I want
to find all solutions, not just those in the interval from zero to two pi, I noticed that
I can take one of these principal solutions and add multiples of two pi to it, because
that'll give me the same angle. So I get pi over six plus two pi k, and pi over six, sorry,
seven pi over six plus two pi k, any integer. This is a correct answer. But it's not as
simple as it could be. Notice that seven pi over six over here on the unit circle is exactly
pi more than pi over six. So instead of taking both of these and adding multiples of two
pi to them, I could get all the same answers by just taking one of them and adding multiples
of pi to it. So a more efficient answer is to say that x equals pi over six plus pi times
k for K any integer. This will still capture all the same solutions. Because when k is
even, I'll get this family of solutions. And when k is odd, I'll get this family. For example,
when k is one pi over six plus one times pi is just the original seven pi over six. If
you think about the fact that tangent has a period of pi instead of two pi, it makes
a lot of sense that you should be able to write the solutions in the form. In this video,
we solved basic trig equations by first, isolating sine, or tangent, or the same thing would
work with cosine. And then using the unit circle to find principal solutions, Principal
solutions are just solutions between zero and two pi. And then adding multiples of two
pi to these principles solutions to get all solutions. For tangent, we noticed that it
was equivalent to just use one principal solution and add multiples of pi instead of two pi.
In a previous video, we looked at trig equations that can be solved using the unit circle.
In this video, we'll solve trig equations that don't involve special values on the unit
circle, and require a calculator instead to solve. Let's look at the equation two cosine
t equals one minus cosine t. As usual, I'll start by simplifying and isolating cosine.
Adding cosine to both sides, I get three cosine t equals one divided by three gives cosine
t equals 1/3. Now 1/3 is not one of my special values on the unit circle, but I can locate
it approximately cosine represents the x value of a point on the unit circle. So I'm looking
for a point on the unit circle whose x coordinate is approximately 1/3. So maybe right here,
and the symmetric angle right here, those are angles in the first and fourth quadrants.
To get a decimal approximation for one of these angles, I can take arc cosine of both
sides of my equation. This gives me t equals arc cosine of 1/3, which, using my calculator
on radian mode, I get a decimal approximation of 1.2310. Up to four decimal places, it's
important to use radian mode here. Since by convention, the answers to trig equations
are expected to be in radians unless otherwise specified. It's also important to notice that
these two equations are not precisely the same thing. Since cosine t equals 1/3, has
infinitely many solutions if we don't restrict to a certain interval, and even if we restrict
to the interval zero to two pi, it still has two different solutions. On the other hand,
our T equals arc cosine of 1/3 has only one solution. And that solution lies between the
angles of zero and pi. So this angle here, the 1.231, a radians must be giving us this
angle, so there's got to be an angle between zero and pi. And to get the other angle this
one, we can use the symmetry of the situation. This angle and this angle are the same size.
So to get all the way around to here, we can go all the way to pi minus r 1.2312 radians.
Using our calculator again, we can compute that two pi minus 1.2310 radians is equal
to 5.05 to two radians. So our two solutions on our interval from zero to two pi, are given
by 1.2310 and 5.05 to two radians. Let me emphasize that we found the second solution
by taking two pi minus the first solution. Now it's straightforward to find all solutions,
we can just take our two principal solutions and add multiples of two pi. It can be helpful
to look at this solution graphically. To solve our equation, cosine t equals 1/3. We want
to know where this graph of y equals cosine of t intersects the horizontal line at y equals
1/3. This intersection point here corresponds to our first solution of 1.2310 radiance.
This intersection point here corresponds to our second solution. Notice that it occurs
at a T value, that's two pi minus this T value here and all the other initial action points
correspond to those first two intersection points shifted over by multiples of two pi.
Next, let's look at the equation for sine x minus one equals two. I'll start by rewriting
this as four sine x equals three, which is equivalent to sine x equals three fourths.
Although three fourths is not a special value on the unit circle, we can still use the unit
circle to get oriented and see how many solutions there should be in the interval from zero
to two pi. Since sine represents the y coordinate of a point on the unit circle, we're looking
for points on the unit circle whose y coordinate is three fourths. So that might be three fourths
might be about here. So that would be an angle about right here. And about right here, so
in the first and second quadrants, let's take the arc sine of both sides to find one of
those angles. I'm getting one of the angles to be arc sine of three fourths, which my
calculator says is 0.8481 radians, that must be this angle here. To get the other angle,
I can use symmetry. Since this angle here, you can get by going up four pi minus my previous
angle, pi minus 0.8481, is equal to 2.2935. So that's my second angle. Notice that this
time, to get the second angle, we use pi minus the first angle, not to pi minus the first
angle like we did for cosine. Once again, we can find all solutions simply by adding
multiples of two pi, we can also locate the solutions on a graph of sine, we're looking
for where the graph of y equals sine of x intersects with the horizontal line at y equals
three fourths. And we can see that we have these two solutions where the second one,
its x value is pi minus the x value this one, and then we have all these additional solutions
that we can get by shifting over by positive and negative multiples of two pi from the
first to finally, let's solve the equation 10x equals four. If we simply take x to be
tan inverse of four, which is 1.3258 radians, we'll get a single solution. But thinking
about the graph of tangent, and intersecting that graph with the horizontal line y equals
four, we see that there should actually be two solutions in the interval from zero to
two pi. This makes sense, because the period of tangent is pi. So any one solution will
get repeated. By intervals of pi. It also makes sense by thinking about the unit circle.
Tangent, which can be thought of as the slope of a line at angle theta takes on all positive
real values, both in the first quadrant and the third quadrant. So there are going to
be two places on the unit circle where the tangent is for. We've already found this one.
To find the other one, we just need to add pi. This gives us our answer for the interval
zero to two pi. And we can add multiples of two pi to get all other solutions. Or if we
want to be more efficient, we can just write the first solution plus multiples of pi instead
of two pi. Because these two solutions differ by exactly pi. Taking the first solution,
and then adding multiples of pi will capture all solutions corresponding to both of these
principal solutions. To summarize, to find our solutions to cosine t equals m, we need
to find first cosine inverse of m. Then take two pi a minus this solution and add multiples
of two pi to both of those. To find solutions to the equation, sine t equals n. We can start
by taking sine inverse of n using pi minus this and adding multiples of to pi. To find
our solutions to tangent t equals P, we can take t equal tan inverse of P, and tan inverse
of p plus pi and add multiples of two pi. Or we can just take 10 inverse of P, and add
multiples of pi. Although the examples that we saw were more simple than some, because
for the examples, we saw, the inverse trig function always landed us in the first quadrant,
these methods will work more generally. That's all for this video on solving trig equations
that require a calculator. This video is about identities involving trig functions like sine
and cosine. But I want to start with some examples that just involve quadratic functions.
If I want to find the solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus 6x minus
seven equals zero, factor it, x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors
equal to 0x minus seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero. And that gives me the
solutions, x equals seven, or x equals negative one. Next, let's look at this more complicated
equation. I'm going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side.
Next, our combined terms on the right hand side. So that gives me x squared minus 6x.
On both sides, well, x squared minus 6x is equal to x squared minus 6x. That's true no
matter what I plug in for x. And therefore, all values of x satisfy this equation, we
can say that the solution set is all real numbers. The second equation is called an
identity, because it holds for all values of the variable. The first equation, on the
other hand is not an identity, because it only holds for some values of x and not all
values. Please pause the video for a moment and try to decide which of the following three
equations or identities that is, which of these equations hold for all values of the
variable. To start out, you might want to test them by plugging in a few values of the
variable and see if the equation holds. The first equation is not an identity. It does
hold for some values of x. For example, if x equals zero, then sine of two times zero
is zero, and two times sine of zero is also zero. So it does hold when x is zero. However,
when x is say, pi over two, then sine of two times pi over two, that's the same thing as
sine of pi, which is zero, but two times sine of pi over two, that's two times one, or two,
and zero is not equal to two. So the equation does not hold for x equals pi over two. Since
it doesn't hold for all values of the variable, it's not an identity. The second equation
is an identity. You can build some evidence for this by plugging in numbers. For example,
cosine of zero plus pi, which is negative one is the same thing as negative of cosine
of zero. You can also check for example, that cosine of pi over six plus pi is the same
thing as negative cosine of pi over six. But even if we check a zillion examples, that's
just evidence, it's not a proof that the identity holds, we could have just gotten lucky with
the values we picked, we can build a little bit stronger evidence by looking at graphs,
I'm going to put theta on the x axis in a pie graph, y equals cosine of theta plus pi.
That's just like the graph of cosine shifted over to the left by pi. On the other hand,
if I graph y equals negative cosine theta, that's the graph of cosine theta, reflected
across the x axis, which gives us the exact same graph. So graphing both sides gives us
strong evidence that this equation is an identity it holds for all values of theta. Now the
strongest evidence of all would be an algebraic proof, which we'll do later in the course,
once we have a formula for the cosine of a sum of two angles. In the meantime, let's
look at equation C. It turns out equation C is an identity. And we could build evidence
for it again by plugging in values for x, or by graphing the left side and the right
side separately, and checking to see that the graphs coincided. But for this example,
I'm going to go ahead and do an algebraic verification. In particular, I'm going to
start with the left side of the equation and rewrite things and rewrite things until I
get to the right side of the equation. The first thing I'll rewrite is secant and tangent
in terms of their constituent functions, sine and cosine. Since secant of x is one over
cosine x, and tangent of x is sine x over cosine x, I can rewrite this expression as
one over cosine x minus sine x times sine x over cosine x. I can clean up those fractions
and write this as one over cosine x minus sine squared x over cosine x. Now, I noticed
that I have two fractions with the same denominator. So I can pull them together as one minus sine
squared x over cosine x. Next, I'm going to rewrite the numerator one minus sine squared
x using the Pythagorean identity that says that cosine squared x plus sine squared x
equals one, and therefore, one minus sine squared x is equal to cosine squared x just
by subtracting sine squared x from both sides. So I can replace my numerator, one minus sine
squared x with cosine squared x. And canceling one cosine from the top and from the bottom,
that's the same thing as cosine of x, which is the right hand side that I was trying to
get to. So a combination of a bunch of algebra, and the Pythagorean identity allows me to
prove that this equation is true for all values of x, it's an identity. The best way to prove
that an equation is an identity is to use algebra, and to use other identities, like
the Pythagorean identity, to rewrite one side of the equation, till it looks like the other
side. The best way to prove the net equation is not an identity is to plug in numbers that
break the identity. That is, make the equation not true. Now, if you're just trying to decide
if an equation is an identity or not, and not worried about proving it, then I recommend
plugging in numbers, or graphing the left and right sides to see if those graphs are
the same. Recall that an identity is an equation that holds for all values of the variable.
This video states and proves three identities called the Pythagorean identities. The first
one is the familiar cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. The second
one says tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared theta. And the third one goes
cotangent squared theta plus one equals cosecant squared theta. Let's start by proving that
cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. I'll do this by drawing the unit
circle with a right triangle inside it by the definition of sine and cosine, the x&y
coordinates of this top point r cosine theta and sine theta, the high partners of my triangle
is one, since that's the radius of my unit circle. Now the length of the base of my triangle
is the same thing as the x coordinate of this point. So that's equal to cosine theta. The
height of this triangle is the same thing as the y coordinate of this point. So that's
sine theta. Now the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles says this side length squared
plus that sine squared is equal to the hypothenar squared. So by the Pythagorean theorem, we
have that cosine theta square plus sine theta squared equals one squared, I can rewrite
that as cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one, since one squared is one,
and cosine squared theta is just a shorthand notation for cosine theta squared. That completes
the proof of the first Pythagorean identity, at least in the case when the angle theta
is in the first quadrant. In the case, when the angle was in a different quadrant, you
can use symmetry to argue the same identity holds. But I won't give the details here.
To prove the next Pythagorean identity, tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared
theta, let's use the first without your an identity, which said that cosine squared theta
plus sine squared theta equals one, I'm going to divide both sides of this equation by cosine
squared theta. Now I'm going to rewrite the left side by breaking apart the fraction into
cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta over cosine squared
theta. Now cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta is just one. And I can rewrite
the next fraction as sine of theta over cosine of theta squared. That's because when I square
a fraction, I can just square the numerator and square the denominator. And sine squared
theta is shorthand for a sine of theta squared. Similarly, for cosine squared theta. Now on
the other side of the equal sign, I can rewrite this fraction as one over cosine theta squared.
Again, that's because when I square the fraction, I just get the one squared, which is one divided
by the cosine theta squared, which is this. I'm almost done. sine theta over cosine theta
is the same thing as tangent theta. And one over cosine theta is the same thing as secant
theta. Using the shorthand notation, that says one plus tan squared theta equals sequencer
data, which, after rearranging is exactly the identity that we were looking for. The
proof of the third for that green identity is very similar. Once again, I'll start with
the identity cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. And this time, I'll
divide both sides by sine squared theta. I'll break up the fraction on the left. And now
I'll rewrite my fractions as cosine theta over sine theta squared plus one equals one
over sine theta squared. Cosine over sign can be written as cotangent. And one over
sine can be written as cosecant. That gives me the identity that I'm looking for. We've
now proved three trig identities. The first one, we proved using the unit circle and the
Pythagorean Theorem. The second and third identities, we proved by using the first identity
and a bit of algebra. The sum and difference formulas are formulas for computing the sine
of a sum of two angles, the cosine of a sum of two angles, the sine of a difference of
two angles, and the cosine of a difference of two angles. Please pause the video for
a moment to think about this question. Is it true that the sine of A plus B is equal
to the sine of A plus the sine of B? No, it's not true. And we can see by an example, if
we plug in say, A equals pi over two and B equals pi, then the sine of pi over two plus
pi is the same thing as a sine of three pi over two, which is negative one. Whereas the
sine of pi over two plus the sine of pi is equal to one plus zero, which is one, negative
one is not equal to one. So this equation does not hold for all values of a and b. There
are a few values of a and b for which it does hold. For example, if a is zero and B zero,
but it's not true in general. Instead, we need more complicated formulas. It turns out
that the sine of the sum of two ends angles A plus B is given by sine of A cosine of B
plus cosine of A, sine of B. The cosine of A plus B is given by cosine A, cosine B minus
sine A sine Bay. I like to remember these with a song, sine cosine cosine sine cosine
cosine minus sine sine. Please feel free to back up the video and sing along with me,
I encourage you to memorize the two formulas for the sine of a sum of angles and the cosine
of a sum of angles. Once you do, it's easy to figure out the sine and cosine of a difference
of two angles. One way to do this is to think of sine of A minus B as sine of A plus negative
B. And then use the angle sum formula. So this works out two, sine cosine plus cosine,
sine. And now, if I use the fact that cosine is even, I know that cosine of negative B
is cosine of B. And since sine is odd, sine of negative b is negative sine of B. So I
can rewrite this as sine of A cosine of B minus cosine of A sine of B. Notice that this
new formula for the difference is the same as the formula for the sum is just that plus
sign turned into a minus sign, we can do the same trick for cosine of A minus B, that's
cosine of A plus minus b, which is cosine A cosine minus b minus sine of A sine of negative
B. Again, using even an odd properties, this gives us cosine A cosine B plus sine A sine
B. Once again, the formula for the difference is almost exactly like the for the sum, just
that minus sign has switched to a plus sign. Now let's use the angle sum formula to find
the exact value for the sine of 105 degrees. Now, 105 degrees is not a special angle on
the unit circle, but I can write it as the sum of two special angles, I can write it
as 60 degrees plus 45 degrees. Therefore, the sine of 105 degrees is the sine of 60
plus 45. And now by the angle sum formula, this is sine, cosine, cosine, sine. And I,
from my unit circle, I can figure out that sine of 60 degrees is root three over two
cosine of 45 degrees root two over two, cosine of 60 degrees is one half, and sine of 45
degrees is root two over two. So this simplifies to root six plus root two over four. For our
last example, let's find the cosine of v plus W, given the values of cosine v, and cosine
W, and the fact that v and w are angles in the first quadrant. Remember, to compute the
cosine of a sum, we can't just add together the two cosines. That wouldn't even make sense
in this case, because adding point nine and point seven would give something bigger than
one and the cosine of something's never bigger than one. Instead, we have to use the angle
sum formula for cosine. So that goes cosine of v plus w equals cosine, cosine, minus sine,
sine. Now, I've already know the cosine of v and the cosine of W. So I could just plug
those in. But I have to figure out the sine of v and the sine of W from the given information.
And one way to do that is to draw right triangles. So here, I'm going to draw a right triangle
with angle V, and another right triangle with angle W. Since I know that the cosine of V
is point nine, I can think of that as nine over 10. And I can think of that as adjacent
over hypotenuse in my right triangle. So I'll decorate my triangles adjacent side with the
number nine and the hypotony is with 10. Similarly, since I know that the cosine of W is point
seven, which is seven tenths, I can put a seven on this adjacent side and attend on
this side. partners'. Now the Pythagorean Theorem, lets me compute the length of the
unlabeled side. So this one is going to be the square root of 10 squared minus nine squared,
that's going to be the square root of 19. And here I have the square root of 10 squared
minus seven squared. So that's the square root of 51. I can now find the sine of V as
the opposite over the hypotenuse. So that's the square root of 19 over 10. And the sine
of W will be the square root of 51 over 10. Because we're assuming v and w are in the
first quadrant, we know the values of sign need to be positive, so we don't need to Jimmy
around with positive or negative signs in our answers, we can just leave them as is.
Now we're ready to plug into our formula. So we have that cosine of v plus w is equal
to point nine times point seven minus the square root of 19 over 10, times the square
root of 51 over 10. using a calculator, this works out to a decimal approximation of 0.3187.
This video gave the angle sum and difference formulas and use them to compute some values.
To see a proof for why the sum formulas hold, please watch my other video. Remember the
angle some formulas, those are the formulas for computing sine of A plus B, and cosine
of A plus B. I like to sing them, sine cosine, cosine, sine, cosine, cosine minus sine sine.
This video gives a geometric proof of those formulas. There are many great proofs of the
angle some formulas, but I'd like to share with you one of my favorites for those who
are interested. Alright, the angle some formulas up here, so we'll know what we're trying to
prove. To prove these formulas, let me start by drawing an angle A and angle B on top of
that. Next, I'm going to draw a line perpendicular to this middle line. And I'm going to extend
the top line until it meets that perpendicular, making a right triangle. Finally, I'll draw
a rectangle around that right triangle that just touches its vertices. My rectangle is
now divided up into four right triangles. And I'm going to choose units of measurement,
so that the high partners of my middle triangle has length one. Now let's stop for a minute
to think about the angles of these other triangles. Since the top and the bottom edge of the rectangle
are parallel lines, and this hypothenar is is a transversal. This angle up here must
have the same measure as a plus b down here. Also, this skinny angle here must have the
same measure as a down here because this angle is 180 degrees, minus 90 degrees minus this
angle here. And this angle A is also 180 degrees, the measure of the angles in a triangle minus
90 degrees minus that same angle. So I'll label this skinny angle with a. Next, let's
figure out as many side length as we can. Based on the middle right triangle with high
partners one, we know that this side length down here must be cosine of B, since adjacent
over hypotenuse is cosine B. Similarly, this side length here must be sine of B. Since
opposite over hypotenuse is sine of B. Now we see that sine of B is the hypotenuse of
this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sign a time sign
B. That's because the opposite over the hypotenuse of this angle has to equal sign a. A similar
argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine A time sign B. Please pause
the video and take a moment to fill in the side length of this right triangle. In this
right triangle, you should be getting sine A cosine B cosine A cosine B, sine of A plus
B and cosine of A plus B. But remember, we have a rectangle here. So the opposite sides
have equal length. This tells us that sine of A plus B has to equal sine of A cosine
of B plus cosine of A sine of B, which is exactly the first angle sum formula. Also,
cosine of A plus B, which is this side length, is exactly the difference of this side length
cosine A cosine B minus this side length, sine of A sine B. And that's the second angle
sum formula. So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof of the angle some formulas.
This video gives formulas for a sine of two theta and cosine of two theta. Please pause
the video for a moment and see if you think this equation sine of two theta equals two
sine theta is true or false. Remember that true means always true for all values of theta,
were false means sometimes they're always false. This equation is false, because it's
not true for all values of theta. One way to see this is graphically, if I graph y equals
sine of two theta, that's like the graph of sine theta, squished in horizontally by a
factor of one half. On the other hand, if I graph y equals two sine theta, that's like
the graph of sine theta stretched vertically by a factor of two. These two graphs are not
the same. So instead, we need a more complicated formula for sine of two theta. And that formula
is sine of two theta is two sine theta, cosine theta. It's not hard to see why that formula
works based on the angle song formula. Recall that sine of A plus B is equal to sine A,
cosine B plus cosine A, sine B. Therefore, sine of two theta, which is sine of theta
plus theta is going to be sine theta, cosine theta, plus cosine theta sine theta. simply
plugging in theta for a and theta for B, in this angle, some formula. Well, sine theta
cosine theta is the same thing as cosine theta sine theta. So I can rewrite this as twice
sine theta cosine theta. That gives me this formula. There's also a formula for cosine
of two theta. And that formula is cosine squared theta minus sine squared theta. Again, we
can use the angle sum formula to see where this comes from. cosine of A plus B is equal
to cosine of A cosine A B minus sine A, sine B. So if we want cosine of two theta, that's
just cosine of theta plus theta, which is cosine theta cosine theta, minus sine theta
sine theta by plugging in beta for A and B. This can be rewritten as cosine squared theta
minus sine squared theta, which is exactly the formula above. Now there are a couple
other formulas for cosine of two theta that are also popular. One of them is one minus
two sine squared theta. And the other one is cosine of two theta is two cosine squared
theta minus one. You can get each of these two formulas from the original one using the
Pythagorean identity. We know that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta is one.
So cosine squared theta is one minus sine squared theta. If I plug that into my original
formula, which I've copied here, so I'm plugging in instead of cosine squared, I'm going to
write one minus sine squared theta, I still have a nother minus sine squared theta. So
that's the same thing as one minus Twice science grade data, which is exactly what I'm looking
for. Similarly, I can use the Pythagorean identity to write sine squared theta as one
minus cosine squared theta. Again, I'll take this equation and copy it below. But this
time, I'm going to plug in for sine squared right here. So that gives me cosine of two
theta is cosine squared theta minus the quantity one minus cosine squared theta. That simplifies
to two cosine squared theta minus one after distributing the negative sign, and combining
like terms. So I have one double angle formula for sine of two theta. And I have three versions
of the double angle formula for cosine of two theta. Now let's use these formulas in
some examples. Let's find the cosine of two theta. If we know that cosine theta is negative
one over root 10, and theta terminates in quadrant three, we have a choice of three
formulas for cosine of two theta, I'm going to choose the second one, because it only
involves cosine of theta on the right side. And I already know my value for cosine theta.
Of course, I could use one of the other ones, but then I'd have to work out the value of
sine theta. So plugging in, I get cosine of two theta is twice negative one over root
n squared minus one, which simplifies to two tenths minus one or negative eight tenths,
negative four fifths. Finally, let's solve the equation two cosine x plus sine of 2x
equals zero. What makes this equation tricky is that one of the trig functions has the
argument of just x, but the other trig function has the argument of 2x. So I want to use my
double angle formula to rewrite sine of 2x. I'll copy down the two cosine x, and now sine
of 2x is equal to two sine x cosine x. At this point, I see a way to factor my equation,
I can factor out a two cosine x from both of these two terms. That gives me one plus
sine x and the product there is equal to zero. That means that either two cosine x is equal
to zero, or one plus sine x is equal to zero. That simplifies two cosine x equals zero,
or sine x is negative one. Using my unit circle, I see that cosine of x is zero at pi over
two, and three pi over two, while sine of x is negative one at three pi over two, there's
some redundancy here, but my solution set is going to be pi over two plus multiples
of two pi, and three pi over two plus multiples of two pi. This video proved the double angle
formulas, sine of two theta is two sine theta cosine theta. and cosine of two theta is cosine
squared theta minus sine squared theta. It also proved two alternate versions of the
equation for cosine of two theta. This video is about the half angle formulas for computing
cosine of theta over two and sine of theta over two. Cosine of theta over two is either
a plus or minus the square root of one plus cosine theta over two. To figure out whether
to use plus or minus, you need to know something about what quadrant, the angle theta over
two is, if you're expecting cosine theta over two to be negative, then you're gonna need
the negative sign, you're expecting this cosine to be positive, then of course, you want the
positive sign since the square root of something is always positive. Notice that this formula
always makes sense, because the inside of the square root sign is always going to be
positive or zero. Since cosine theta can't be any more negative than negative one, we
have a similar formula for sine of theta over two, and that's plus or minus the square root
of one minus cosine theta over two. Notice that the formulas for both cosine of A half
angle and sine of A half angle both have cosine in them, they just differ by the positive
or negative side and the inside of the square root. To see why these formulas hold, let's
recall the form In the last four double angles, we know that cosine of 2x is equal to two
cosine squared x minus one, or we can write cosine of 2x as one minus two, sine squared
of x. Of course, of course, we can also write cosine of 2x as cosine squared x minus sine
squared x. But this one won't be relevant to our discussion right now. So I'm going
to start with this first formula. And I'm going to make the substitution theta equals
to x, that allows me to write cosine theta is two cosine squared theta over two minus
one. Since if theta is 2x, then x is theta over two. Now, I'm going to solve for cosine
of theta over two. So I'll add one to both sides. Divide both sides by two 
and take the square root of both sides. That gives me that cosine of theta over two is
going to be plus or minus the square root of cosine theta plus one over two, which is
the formula we're looking for. I can carry a similar process out with the second formula.
I'll substitute theta for 2x, which means that x is theta over two, that gives me cosine
theta is one minus two sine squared theta over two. Now I'll solve for sine of theta
over two. I'll start by adding two sine squared theta over two to both sides. Next, I'll subtract
cosine theta from both sides. Next, I'll divide both sides by two. And finally, I'll take
the square root of both sides. That gives me sine of theta over two is plus or minus
the square root of one minus cosine theta over two, which is the formula I was looking
for. Now that we've got our formulas, and know where they come from, let's use them
in an example. Let's suppose that sine theta is four fifths, and theta is between pi over
two and pi. That means it's in the second quadrant, we want to find the exact values
of cosine theta over two and sine theta over two. Since theta is between pi over two and
pi, theta over two will be between pi over four and pi over two. So theta over two is
somewhere in the first quadrant. That means that cosine theta over two and sine theta
over two will both be positive. Let me write down my half angle formulas. And I know I
can ignore the negative version and just use the positive version. Now unfortunately, I'm
just given the value of sine theta and not cosine theta, so I can't plug in directly,
first, I have to use this value to figure out what cosine might be. I'll draw a right
triangle with angle theta. And since sine of theta is four fifths, I'll decorate the
triangle with a four and a five on the hypothesis. That means that this side length is going
to be five squared square root of five squared minus four squared, which is the square root
of nine, which is three. That means that cosine theta is going to be either plus or minus
three fifths because it's adjacent over hypotenuse. Now since I'm in the angle, the second quadrant
for my angle theta, cosine is actually going to be negative three fifths. Now I can plug
into my formulas, I get that cosine of theta over two is going to be the square root of
one minus three fifths over two. That simplifies to the square root of two fifths divided by
two, which is the square root of 1/5, or one over the square root of five. Sine of theta
over two is the square root of one minus cosine theta, so that's one minus negative three
fifths over two, that's the square root of one plus three fifths, or eight fifths over
to the square root of four fifths or two over the square root of five. In this video, we
found formulas for the cosine of A half angle, and the sine of A half angle and use them
in an example. solving a right triangle means finding the lengths of all the sides and the
measures of the angles given partial information. In this example, we're given the length of
one side, and the measure of one angle. Plus we know the measure of this right angle is
90 degrees, we need to find the measure of the third angle labeled capital A, and the
length of the two sides labeled lowercase b and lowercase C. To find the measure of
angle A, let's use the fact that the measures of the three angles of a triangle add up to
180 degrees. So that means that 49 degrees plus 90 degrees plus a is equal to 180 degrees.
So A is equal to 180 degrees minus 90 degrees minus 49 degrees, which works out to 41 degrees.
To find the length of the side B, we have a couple of possible options. We could use
the fact that tan of 49 degrees, which is opposite over adjacent is B over 23. So b
is 23 times tan 49 degrees, which works out to 26.46 units. Alternatively, we could use
the fact that tan of 41 degrees is 23 over b since now if we're looking at the angle
here, 23 is our opposite and B is an adjacent, that's a little bit harder to solve algebraically.
But we can write B tan 41 degrees equals 23, which means that B is 23 divided by 1041 degrees
with a calculator that works out again to 26.46. The reason we want to use tan in this
problem and not say sine or cosine is because tan of say 49 degrees relates the unknown
side that we're looking for B to the side that we know the measure of if we had use
sine instead, we'll be saying that sine of 49 is B over C and we'd have two unknowns,
which would make it difficult to solve. Next, to find the side length C, we can have a few
options, we could use a trig function again. For example, we could use the cosine of 49
degrees, that's adjacent over hypotenuse, which is 23 oversee. Solving for C, we get
that C is 23 over cosine 49. Which works out to 35.06 units. Another option would be to
use the Pythagorean Theorem to find C. Since we know 23 squared plus b squared equals c
squared. In other words, that's 23 squared plus 26.46 squared equals c squared, which
means that C is the square root of that song, which works out again to 35.06. To review
the ideas we used where the sum of the angles is equal to 180 degrees. We used facts like
tangent of an angle being opposite over adjacent and similar facts about sine and cosine. And
we use the Pythagorean Theorem. This allowed us to find all the angles and side lengths
of the triangle knowing just the side length of one side and the angle of one of the non
right angles to begin with. In this next example, we don't know any of the angles except for
the right angle, but we know to have the side lengths. To find the unknown angle theta,
we can use the fact that cosine theta is adjacent overhype hotness, so that's 10 over 15. Cosine
is a good trig function to use here, because this equation relates our unknown angle to
our two known sides. So we just have one unknown in our equation to solve for. To solve for
theta, we just take the cosine inverse of 10/15 which is 0.8411 radians, or 48.19 degrees.
To find the measure of angle fee, we could use the fact that sine of fee is 10 over 15
and take sine inverse of 10/15. But probably a little easier just to use the fact that
these three angles do 180 degrees. That tells us that fee plus 90 plus 48.19 is equal to
180 Which means that fee is 41.81. Finally, we can find x, either using a trig function
or by using the Pythagorean Theorem. To find it using a trig function, we could write down
something like tan of 48.19 degrees is x over 10. To find that using the Tyrion theorem,
we'd write down 10 squared plus x squared equals 15 squared. I'll use the Pythagorean
theorem and find the x by doing the square root of 15 squared minus 10 squared. That
gives me an answer of 11.18. Notice that we use many of the same ideas as in the previous
problem. For example, the fact that the sum of the angles is 180. The Pythagorean theorem
and the trig functions like tan, sine and cosine, we also use the inverse trig functions
to get from an equation like this one to the angle. This video showed how it's possible
to find the lengths of all the sides of a right triangle. And then measures of all the
angles given partial information. For example, the measure of one angle and one side or from
two sides. Recall that solving a triangle means finding all the lengths of the sides
and all the measures of the angles from partial information. The Law of Cosines is a tool
that can help us solve triangles that are not necessarily right triangles. Recall that
the Pythagorean theorem says that for a right triangle, like this one, the length of the
hypothesis is related to the lengths of the sides by the formula c squared equals a squared
plus b squared. I like to think of the law of cosines. As a generalization of the Pythagorean
Theorem, two triangles that are not necessarily right triangles. loosely speaking, the Law
of Cosines says that c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared plus a correction
factor where the correction factor depends on the size of the angle, that's opposite
to side C. For this first triangle, on the left, the angle that's opposite to side C
is exactly a right angle. So we know that c squared is exactly equal to a squared plus
b squared. But in this next triangle, the angle opposite decides C prime is a little
bit less than a right angle. So we expect the side length C prime should be a little
bit shorter than the side length C in the previous triangle that had the same side length
A and B for its legs. Therefore, C prime squared should be less than a squared plus b squared,
or in other words, C prime squared should equal a squared plus b squared minus a little
bit. In this third triangle, the angle opposite C double prime is a little bigger than 90
degrees. So this side length C double prime should be a little bit longer than the side
length C in the right triangle with the same size legs. So C double prime squared should
be bigger than a squared plus b squared, we can write this as C double prime squared is
equal to a squared plus b squared plus a little bit. The Law of Cosines says precisely what
this little correction factor is. It says that for any triangle with sides, a B and
C, and angle capital C, opposite side C, side c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared
minus two A B, cosine angle C. Let's analyze what happens with this equation when angle
C is equal to 90 degrees less than 90 degrees and greater than 90 degrees. If angle C is
equal to 90 degrees, then cosine of angle C is equal to zero. So we have that c squared
is equal to a squared plus b squared, the ordinary Pythagorean Theorem. If on the other
hand, angle C is less than 90 degrees, then from the unit circle, we know that cosine
of C is positive. So to a B, cosine C is a positive number, and we'll be subtracting
a little bit from our A squared plus B squared, just like we saw in the picture. Finally,
if angle C is bigger than 90 degrees, then we can see from the unit circle that cosine
FC is negative. So to a B, cosine capital C is going to be less than zero. And we're
going to be subtracting a negative number, which means we're actually adding a little
bit, just like we saw in the third picture. When labeling a triangle, the convention is
to use capital letters for the angles and lowercase letters for the side lengths. And
to put side A opposite angle A, and so on. When we wrote the law of cosines, on the previous
page, we wrote c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two A B, cosine angle
C. But it doesn't matter which side we call a, which side we call B, and which side we
call C. All that matters is that this angle is opposite to the side and between these
two sides. So we could have just as easily written a squared is equal to b squared plus
c squared minus two B, C, cosine A. all we've done is replace C with A, A with B, and B
with C and our labeling scheme. Or instead, we could put the B squared on the left side
and right b squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B, we can
use whichever of these three forms is most convenient for the problem at hand. Let's
use the law of cosines. To find all the side lengths and angles in this triangle. By convention,
I'll call the side opposite to angle A little a and the side opposite angle B, little B.
Notice that we know two side lengths and the angle between them. So that's an S, a s, side
angle side triangle. If we write down the law of cosines, with the unknown side, c squared
on the left side, then we have all the values for the variables on the right side. So let's
plug them in. I'll use a calculator in degree mode to find that c squared is equal to 44.44.
taking the square root, I get that c is equal to 6.67. Next, I'll use the law of cosines.
To find the angle B, I'll need to use a version of the Law of Cosines that has cosine be right
here. That's the version that has little b squared on the left side and goes b squared
equals a squared plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B. I can plug in values for all
my side lengths. And now I can solve for cosine B. To do that, I'll subtract eight squared
and 6.67 squared from both sides. And now I'll divide both sides by negative two times
eight times 6.67. using a calculator, this gives me that cosine of B is equal to negative
0.1172. The negative value of cosine indicates that my angle B must be greater than 90 degrees,
which agrees with the figure. Next, I can take cosine inverse of both sides to get that
b is equal to cosine inverse negative 0.1172, which works out to 96.73 degrees. The last
thing I need to do is solve for angle A, I could use the Law of Cosines again, and work
out angle A just like I worked out angle B here. But a simpler thing to do is to use
the fact that the sum of the three angles equals 180 degrees. In other words, a plus
37 degrees plus 96.73 degrees equals 180 degrees. So A is going to be 180 minus 37 minus 96.73,
which works out to 46.27 degrees. In the previous example, we were given two sides, and the
angle between them. In this example, instead, we're given three side lengths. So I'll call
this and s, s, s, side side side triangle, we need to find all three angles. Although
there are a lot of computations involved, the ideas are the same as in the previous
problem. Defined angle capital C, we need the form of the Law of Cosines That has cosine
of C on the right side, and little C on the left side. To find angle A, we need the form
of the Law of Cosines that has cosine A on the right side and little a on the left side.
And to find angle B, we need the form of the Law of Cosines that has cosine of B on the
right side, and little b squared on the left side. For each of these three equations, I'll
plug in the side lengths. So for the cosines and use inverse cosine to find my angles.
Notice that my three angles 60 degrees, 32 point 20 degrees, and 87.79 degrees add up
to just almost 180 degrees, the difference is just around off error. In fact, I could
have saved myself some work by just finding the measure of angle C, and the measure of
angle A, and then subtracting them from 180 degrees to get the measure of angle B. In
this video, we stated the law of cosines and used it to solve some triangles. The Law of
Cosines can be thought of as the Pythagorean Theorem, with the correction factor to account
for triangles that aren't right triangles. Recall that solving a right triangle means
finding all the lengths of the sides and all the measures of the angles from partial information.
The Law of Cosines is a tool that can help us solve triangles that are not necessarily
right triangles. We call it the Pythagorean theorem says that for a right triangle, like
this one, c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared. I like to think of the law
of cosines. As a generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem, two triangles that are not necessarily
right triangles. loosely speaking, the Law of Cosines says that c squared is equal to
a squared plus b squared plus a correction factor where the correction factor depends
on the size of the angle that's opposite sides see, in this first triangle, on the left,
the angle opposite to side C is a right angle. So we know that c squared is equal to exactly
a squared plus b squared. But on the next triangle, the angle opposite to side C prime
is a little bit less than a right angle. So this side, C prime should be a little shorter
than a squared plus b squared. All right, C prime squared is equal to a squared plus
b squared minus a bit. In this third triangle, says the angle opposite to side C double prime
is a little bit bigger than 90 degrees, this side length should be a little bit bigger
than a squared plus b squared. So I'll write it as a squared plus b squared plus a little
bit. The Law of Cosines says exactly what this little correction factor is. It says
that for any triangle with sides, A, B and C and angle capital C are opposite to side
C. C squared is equal to a squared plus b squared minus two A B, cosine of angle C.
No notice that if the angle C is less than 90 degrees, cosine of C is going to be a positive
number. And so we'll be subtracting a positive quantity, just like we saw in the picture
above. If however, angle C is bigger than 90 degrees, then cosine of c is negative.
So by subtracting to a B, cosine C, we're actually adding a little bit, and we get a
longer side as in this picture. When labeling a triangle, the convention is to use lowercase
letters for the side lengths and uppercase letters for the angles, and to put angle A
opposite side A, and so on. When we wrote the law of cosines, on the previous page,
we wrote c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two A B, cosine C. But it doesn't
matter which side we call a, which side we call B, and which side the coffee. All that
matters is that this angle is opposite to this side, and between these two sides, so
we could have just as easily written a squared equals b squared plus c squared minus two
B, C code sine A or B squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B, we
can use whichever of these three forms is most convenient for the problem at hand. Let's
use the law of cosines. To find the side length the angles of this triangle, by convention,
I'm going to call the side opposite angle B, side, little B, and the side opposite angle
A side, little a. Since we know two side lengths, and the angle between them, we have all the
information on the right side of the law of cosines. So I'll plug that in. And use a calculator
in degree mode to find that c squared equals 44.44. taking the square root, I get that
C equals 6.67. Next, I'll use the law of cosines. To find the angle B, I need to use a version
of the law of cosines. That mentions cosine of angle B here, so it'll need to mention
side length little B here. So that'll be the form b squared. On the left, I'll get a squared
plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B. On the right, I'll plug in values from my side
lengths. And now I can solve for cosine B by subtracting eight squared, and 6.67 squared
from both sides. And now dividing both sides by negative two times eight times 6.67. using
a calculator, this gives me that cosine of B is equal to negative point 1172. The negative
value of cosine indicates that my angle B must be greater than 90 degrees, which agrees
with a picture. Next, I can take cosine inverse of both sides to get that b is equal to cosine
inverse of negative point 1172, which works out to 96.73 degrees. The last thing I have
to do is solve for angle A, I could use the Law of Cosines again, and work it out just
like I did here for angle B. But a simpler method is to just use the fact that the sum
of the three angles is 180 degrees. So a must be 180 degrees minus 37 degrees minus 96.73
degrees. This works out to 46.27 degrees. In the previous example, we were given two
sides and the angle between them. In this angle, were given instead, three side lengths,
and we need to find all three angles. Although there are a lot of computations involved,
the ideas are the same as in the previous problem. To find angle capital C, we need
the form of the law of cosines, that has cosine of capital C on the right side, to find capital
B, we need to use the form of the Law of Cosines that has cosine of B on the right side, and
little B on the left side. So it'll be b squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two
a C cosine B. At the find angle A, we need a little A squared on the left side. So that
will get cosine of angle A on the right side. For each of these three equations, I'll plug
in the side lengths, solve for the cosine of the angle and use inverse cosine to find
my angles. Notice that my three angles 60 degrees, 87.79 degrees, and 32 point 20 degrees
add up to almost exactly 180 degrees, it's just a tiny bit off due to roundoff error.
In fact, I could have saved myself some work by just finding the measure of angle C, and
the measure of angle B, for example, and then subtracting their sum from 180 degrees to
get angle A. In this video, we stated the law of cosines and used it to solve some triangles.
The Law of Cosines can be thought of as the Pythagorean Theorem with an adjustment factor
to account for triangles that aren't right triangles. The Law of Sines is a tool that
can be used to solve triangles that are not necessarily right triangles. It's especially
useful when we know two angles and one side and it can also be used in this situation
where we know two sides and an angle Let's not between them. The Law of Sines says that
for a triangle with angles A, B and C, opposite two sides, lowercase a, b, and c respectively.
The sine of angle A divided by the length of side A is equal to the sine of B over B,
which is also equal to the sine of C over C. Notice that we're taking the sine of the
three angles, and dividing by the three opposite side lengths. Suppose we know that angle A
is 55 degrees, angle C is 67 degrees, and Side B is 20 degrees, we want to solve the
triangle, that is find the length of the other sides and the measure of the third angle.
Since we know two angles already, we can find the third angle by subtracting from 180 degrees.
So angle B is 58 degrees. Now I can use the Law of Sines to find my remaining side lengths.
To find side A, I'll use the fact that sine of angle A over side length A is equal to
sine of angle B over side length B. Since I already know three of these quantities,
angle A, angle B, and side length B, I can plug in and solve for the unknown side length
a to solve or multiply both sides by a and then multiply both sides by 20 over the sine
of 58 degrees. That gives me that a is equal to 20 sine 55 oversized 58, which works out
to 19.32. Please pause the video and use the same method to find side length See, this
time, we need to involve sign of C and sidelink see in our equation. And we could use either
the B's or the A's since they're both known for the other side. I'll plug in values as
I can and solve for C. C works out to 21.71. In the previous example, we use the Law of
Sines to find the side lengths of a triangle, because we already knew the angles. In this
next example, we're given some side lengths. And we're going to need to solve for some
angles. This can be tricky, because when we write down the law of sines and start solving
for an angle, we first solve for sine of the angle. But there can be two plausible angles
that both have the same sign. For example, if sine of the angle happens to be one half,
then the angle could be either 30 degrees, or 150 degrees. In some cases, this can lead
to two possible triangles that both have the conditions given When this happens, and there
are two possible solutions. I call this an ambiguous case. With that warning, let's figure
out the details of this example. Plugging in my given information into the law of signs,
I'll focus on this portion of the equation where there's only one unknown to solve for.
First off, solve for sine of A, which is eight times sine 40 degrees over seven, which works
out to 0.7346. From the unit circle, I can see that there'll be two possible angles with
this sine one in the first quadrant and one in the second quadrant. If I take sine inverse
of both sides of my equation, I get the solution in the first quadrant, which is 47.27 degrees.
Since this angle right here is 47.27 degrees, so is this angle here. And so the angle that
I want in the second quadrant I can get by going 180 minus 47.27 degrees, which works
out to 132.731 of these possible angles. It's an acute angle, the other one and obtuse angle,
but both are possible configurations are sketch the possible triangles in both triangles,
side length A and B are the same and angle B is the same But everything else is different.
We can continue to solve for the other angle and side in each case. In the left side, I'll
call this case one, we can solve for angle C, by taking 180 degrees minus angle B minus
angle A. That gives us an angle just over 90 degrees 92.73 degrees. Now we can use either
the Law of Sines or the law of cosines. To find the final side length C, I'll use the
Law of Sines again. So I plug in the value of angle C into this part of my equation,
and solve for C to get C equals sine 92.73 degrees times seven over sine 40 degrees,
which works out to 10.88. For the right hand triangle, we can carry out the same steps
to get angle C. And now plug in to the Law of Sines. To get side length to see, we finish
solving for the two possible triangles. With these given side length, and angle. In this
video, we use the Law of Sines to solve a triangle in two different situations. In the
first situation, we had two angles and the side between them. So that's an A s, a triangle,
for angle, side angle. And that situation, we ended up just using the law of science
to solve for side lengths, and there was no ambiguity. In the second situation, we had
a triangle where we knew two side lengths and an angle that was not between them. So
I'll call that s s A. And in that case, we did find two possible triangles. That would
work. The SSA situation doesn't always give two possible triangles. Sometimes when you
go through the two cases, and figure out all the other angles and side lengths, you'll
get an impossible situation. And the angle, for example, that's got to be negative. Because
the other two angles add up to more than 180 degrees by but you do have to be on the lookout
for two possible triangles when you're solving a triangle with the SSA information given.
This video describes some of the features of a parabola. Its vertex, focus and directrix.
I want to start by finding the equation of all points that are equidistant the same distance
from a point zero p on the y axis, and the horizontal line y equals negative P. I'm assuming
here that P is positive, for starters, certainly the origin will be among those points as it
has a distance of P from the point and P from the line. But the other points on the x axis
will be closer to the line than they are to the point. So if I want the set of points
that are the same distance from the point of the line, that's going to be a curve that
curved upwards, something like this. So for example, a point out here will be the same
distance from the point as it is from the line. So our intuition is suggesting that
this set of points should be the shape of a parabola. Let's confirm this with some algebra.
If we take an arbitrary point, with coordinates x, y, its distance from the point zero P is
given by the distance formula, x minus zero squared plus y minus p squared. Its distance
from the line y equals negative P is just given by its difference in Y coordinates.
So that's going to be y minus negative p or y plus P. Let me set these two quantities
equal to each other. And simplify, I can square both sides to get on the left x minus zero
squared with the same thing as x squared plus y minus p squared equals y plus p squared.
Now I'll distribute out, that gives me x squared plus y squared minus two p y plus p squared
equals y squared plus two p y plus p squared. The P squares cancel out as do the Y squared,
and I'm left with x squared equals four p y after move In this negative two p y to the
other side, I could also write this as y equals one over four p x squared. And you might recognize
this as the standard parabola y equals x squared, transformed by vertically stretched it stretching
or shrinking it by this factor of whenever for pee. You might recall that this lowest
point of the parabola is called the vertex. This point here is called its focus. And the
line here is called the directrix. Notice that the number of P in this equation represents
the distance between the vertex and the focus, and also represents the distance between the
vertex and the directrix line. For this reason, if you're interested in the focus and the
vertex, this form of the equation might be more useful than the equivalent form something
like y equals A x squared, where the that distance P is more hidden. Now, so far, we've
just considered the case when a p is greater than zero. Let's look for a moment at what
happens when p is less than zero, then when we draw the point zero, P is going to be below
the x axis. And the directrix y equals negative P is going to be above the x axis because
we're taking the negative of a negative number makes it a positive y value. Our parabola
will also be upside down. All the algebra works out the same is just in our equation,
this coefficient of y will now be a negative number instead of a positive one. Or if we
write it in this other form, which might be more familiar, our coefficient of x squared
will be negative instead of positive, which signifies that the parabola is pointing down.
Since P is now a negative number, if we want to talk about distances, we should write absolute
value of p instead of P. Next, let's turn things sideways by looking at the equation
for all points equidistant from a point P zero. on the x axis. Here, we're assuming
For starters, that P is bigger than zero, and a vertical line at x equals negative P.
Our intuition suggests that this should be a parabola pointing sideways. And we can work
out the same algebra steps to get an equation for it. Starting with an arbitrary point,
x y, the distance from the point P zero is going to be given by x minus p squared plus
y minus zero squared, the distance from the line x equals negative P is going to be given
by the difference in x coordinates. So that's going to be x minus negative p, or just x
plus P. I'll set these two distances equal to each other, square both sides like before,
and simplify. This gives me the equation y squared equals four p x, which I could also
rewrite as x equals one over four p y squared or x equals A y squared, where my a corresponds
to my one over four P. Once again, if p is negative, then I probably pointing the opposite
direction, but my equation will still be the same, it'll just have a negative coefficient
of x instead of a positive one. The negative number of being hidden inside this variable
P. As before, the absolute value of p gives me the distance between the vertex and the
focus, and also gives me the distance between the vertex and the directrix. Now let's find
the equation of a parabola with a vertex at some arbitrary point h k instead of the origin,
assuming that the parabola opens up or down. If the parabola had its vertex at the origin,
we know it would be given by the equation x squared equals four p y, or I could rewrite
that as y equals one over four p x squared. So this parabola should just be shifted to
the right by H and up by K. From transformations of functions. We know we can accomplish this
by sticking a x minus h on the inside and putting a plus k on the outside. In other
words, we have y minus k equals one over four P times x minus h squared. Or we can write
this as x minus h squared equals four P times y minus k. So this is the original All with
a vertex at the origin, and here is the transformed by shifting right and up to have a vertex
at h k, notice that the equations are exactly the same. It's just you stuck in a minus h
and a minus k near the X and near the y, this transform parabola will have its focus, a
distance of P up from the vertex. So that's going to be the point h, k plus p, that's
going to have as directrix at a distance p down from the vertex. So that's going to be
the line y equals k minus P. Everything's the same for this other parabola pointing
downwards, we just have P is negative in that case, the same story holds for the parabola
is pointing right and left, the original equation, y squared equals four p x gets transformed
when we shift the parabola over into y minus k squared equals four p x minus h. This time,
the vertex is a distance p to the left or right of my vertex. So here it would be h
plus p, k. And the directrix would be shifted over by P also from the vertex. So this would
be the vertical line x equals h minus P. It works the same way, when the parabola is opening,
left instead of right, it's just in this case, P is negative. Let's use this information
to find the equation of a parabola with vertex at two, four, and focus at negative one, four.
I'll start with a quick sketch, which will help me see how the parabola is lined up.
So here's the vertex at two, four. And the focus is at negative one, four. So here's
the focus here. Now says the problem always has its focus, that means that this problem
must be pointing left and looks something like this. The directrix is going to be on
the other side of the parabola, the same distance as the distance between the vertex and the
focus. Since this distance is a distance of three to minus negative one is three, the
directrix must be three units over here to the right, and so that would be the line x
equals five. Since my problems open to the left, I know I need to use the form of the
equation y minus k squared equals four p x minus h, where h k is the vertex, so that's
two four, I also know that P is going to be negative. And since the absolute value of
p represents the distance between the vertex and the focus, I know that P must be negative
three. So filling on all these numbers, I get y minus four squared equals four times
negative three times x minus two. I'll simplify that to y minus four squared equals negative
12x minus two. In this video, we looked at special forms of the equation for a parabola,
the forms y minus k squared equals four p x minus h, and x minus h squared equals four
p y minus k. In these equations, h k represents the vertex and PS absolute value gives the
distance between the vertex and the focus and between the vertex and the directrix.
parabolas in this form, are opening right if p is bigger than zero, and left if p is
less than zero, and parabolas in this form, are opening up if p is bigger than zero, and
down if p is less than zero. This video is about ellipses. Recall that a circle can be
defined as a set of points whose distance from a fixed point is a constant. And he lips
can be defined as a set of points, such that the sum of the distances from two fixed points
is a constant. The two fixed points are called focuses or foe sigh The sum of the distances
to the to fo Sai is the total length of the string, which is held constant as I draw the
ellipse. Let's examine the features of an ellipse in more detail. In these pictures,
the two black dots are the focuses or fo sigh. The red line segment that cuts through the
middle of the ellipse in the long direction and passes through this low sigh, it's called
the major axis. The line segment that cuts through the middle of the ellipse in the shorter
direction is called the minor axis. And the two points at the tips of the ellipse where
the major axis actually touches the ellipse are called the vertices. And ellipse could
be elongated in any direction, but will only consider ellipses that are elongated either
in the horizontal direction, or the vertical direction. Let's find the equation of an ellipse
whose fo cy are at negative c zero, and c zero, and whose vertices are at negative a
zero and a zero. This will be an ellipse that's elongated in the horizontal direction. For
any point x, y on the ellipse, the sum of the distance from x y to the first focus,
plus its distance to the second focus has to be some constant. And in fact, it turns
out that constant has to equal to a, I'll show you why. If you look at this point right
here on the far right tip of the ellipse, its distance from the first focus is going
to be to C plus a minus C. And as distance from the second focus is just going to be
a minus say, if you add up c plus c plus a minus c plus a minus C, you get exactly to
a. So let me write out my formulas for distances, the distance from a point x y to the first
focus, the point negative c zero is going to be the square root of x minus negative
c squared plus y minus zero squared. And the distance from x y to the second focus, the
point c zero is going to be the square root of x minus c squared plus y minus zero squared.
That Psalm needs to add up to two a, after a fair amount of algebra, this simplifies
the expression a squared minus c squared x squared plus a squared y squared equals a
squared times a squared minus c squared. If we let b squared equals a squared minus c
squared, then we can rewrite this as b squared x squared plus a squared y squared equals
a squared b squared, and dividing both sides by a squared b squared, this gives us the
form of the equation for the ellipse x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared
equals one. Since we got b squared as a squared minus c squared, it follows that b is less
than a. In fact, B is half the length of the minor axis. In other words, this point right
here is the point zero, B, and this point is the point zero negative B. To see why this
is true, let's draw these two right triangles. The sum of the side lengths that I've drawn
has to be the total length of the string. So that equals to a, which means each of these
side lengths must be a. Now the base of this triangle is C. So by the Pythagorean Theorem,
this height squared must be a squared minus c squared. Since b squared is defined as a
squared minus c squared, this height must be B. To summarize, for a number a bigger
than B, the equation x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one represents
any lips. That's elongated in the horizontal direction, whose major axis terminates in
the points minus a zero, and a zero, and whose minor access terminates in the points zero
B, and zero minus b. It's fo cy are at the points negative c zero, and c zero. And the
relationship between a B and C is that b squared is a squared minus c squared equivalently.
If we add c squared to both sides, and subtract b squared from both sides, we can write See
squared equals a squared minus b squared. The way I remember this is that the biggest
of the three numbers A, B, and C is definitely going to be a, since a is half the length
of the major axis, which is bigger than half the length of the minor axis, and definitely
bigger than the length between the origin and one of the focuses. Since a is the biggest,
and we have a Pythagorean Theorem relationship between a, b and c, the equation must be b
squared plus c squared equals a squared, which can be rearranged to either of these two equations.
Now what happens instead, if we have a bigger than B still, but this time, we're dividing
y squared by the bigger number squared, and x squared by the smaller number squared? Well,
this basically reverses the roles of x and y in my equation. And so we end up with the
major axis on the y axis stretching between the points, zero a, and zero negative a, whereas
the minor axis is going to be along the x axis going in between negative b zero, and
B zero, and the first side are going to be here on the y axis again. So in this case,
my lives is elongated in the vertical direction. Our previous ellipses were centered at the
origin. What if the ellipse is centered instead of an arbitrary point, HK, well, then we need
to shift everything over by h in the horizontal direction, and K in the vertical direction.
So instead of the equation, x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals
one, we're gonna have to have x minus h squared over a squared plus y minus k squared over
b squared equals one, where A is bigger than B, that's for an ellipse elongated in the
horizontal direction. If we want an ellipse elongated in the vertical direction, we'll
still take a bigger than B, but we'll reverse the roles of x and y. So this becomes x squared
over b squared plus y squared over a squared equals one for the center at the origin. And
to shifted over, we get x minus h squared over b squared plus y minus k squared over
a squared equals one. I'll draw some pictures below. With some thought we can label key
points. For example, this vertex must be shifted over by an amount a, since a is half the length
of the major axis. So it'll have coordinates H plus a, k was this vertex will be h minus
A k. This point up here should be h, k plus b, and this one, h k minus b, the fo cy are
it, H plus c, k, and H minus C. Okay. We can label the points on the ellipse that's elongated
vertically. Similarly, let's write the equation of the ellipse drawn below, and then we'll
find it so cy, its major axis is in the vertical direction, right here. Its top vertex is at
the point four, three, as bottom vertex is at the point for negative nine. Its center
is halfway between its two vertices, which is right here, at the point four, negative
three. Finally, I can read off the points at the end of the minor axis. So this one
is at nine, negative three, and this one is at negative one, negative three. Since my
lips is elongated vertically, I know I have an equation of the form x minus h squared
over b squared plus y minus k squared over a squared equals one with a bigger than be
my center is my point h k. And that's equal to four negative three, a is half the length
of the major axis. So that's the vertical distance between this point and this point,
I can just take the difference of Y coordinates and see that a is equal to six. B is half
the length of a minor axis. So looking at the difference in x coordinates of these two
points, I see that b is equal to five. Throwing that all into my equation, I get that x minus
four squared over five squared plus y plus three squared over six squared equals one,
the fo cy are going to be somewhere along the major axis somewhere above and below the
center. To figure out how far they are, I need to use the fact that c squared is equal
to a squared minus b squared. So in this case, c squared is six squared minus five squared,
which is 11. Which means that C is the square root of 11, which is a little bit bigger than
three So, the two first sigh, our distance of squared of 11, above and below the center,
and so they'll have coordinates of four, negative three plus a squared of 11 and four, negative
three minus the square root of 11. This video detailed the anatomy of ellipse, including
its major axis, its minor axis, its vertices, and its fossa. This video is about hyperbolas.
You might recall that any lips is the set of points x y, such that the sum of the distances
between x y and two fixed points called the fo cy is a constant. Well, I hyperbola is
a set of points x y, such that the difference of the distances between x y and each of two
fixed points, called the first side is a constant. In this picture on the left, the two blue
lines are the two branches of the hyperbola. The two red points are the focuses or foe
side. So, for a point x, y on the hyperbola. If I look at the distance from x, y to one
focus, and the distance from x, y to the other focus, the difference of those two distances
will be the same no matter which point x y on the hyperbola that I choose. If I draw
a line between the two fourths I, that line is called the transverse axis. In this left
picture, we have a vertical transverse axis. And the hyperbola itself reminds me of a person
lying down horizontally. Now in the right picture, our transverse axis between the two
fo psi is horizontal. And the blue hyperbola itself kind of reminds me of a person standing
up vertically. It's possible for a hyperbola to be oriented other ways besides horizontally
and vertically, but will only consider horizontal and vertical orientations in this video. If
you look at where the transverse axis intersects the blue branches of the hyperbola, you'll
find these two points. those points are called the vertices. Notice that the vertices are
the two points on the two branches that are closest to one another. The point halfway
between the two vertices, it's also halfway between the two foes side is called the center
of the hyperbola. The two black dotted lines that I've drawn that form an X are not actually
part of the hyperbola. They're called the asymptotes. And you can think of them as guidelines
for drawing the hyperbola. Because the hyperbola gets closer and closer to these asymptotes,
but doesn't cross them. We'll talk more about the asymptotes later. Let's find the equation
of a hyperbola with both sides at negative c zero, and c zero, and vertices at negative
a zero and a zero. This hyperbola will have at center at the origin. From the distance
definition of hyperbola. We know that if we have a point x, y on the hyperbola, then if
we take the distance from that point to the first focus, and the distance to the second
focus and subtract them, we should get a constant. We're always taking the positive difference
here. So if we're on the right branch, we'll take the distance to the left focus minus
the shorter distance to the right focus. And if we happen to be on the left branch, then
we would take the longer distance to the right focus minus the shorter distance, the left
focus, when we do the differences that way, we should always get the same number. And
in fact, that difference should equal to A I'll show you why. The reason is, if I take
my point to be this vertex here, then its distance to this focus is exactly c minus
A because C is bigger than a. And this distance to that focus is going to be well let's see,
this is a, this is a and this is c minus a. So that different distance will be a plus
a plus c minus a. Now I'm going to do the difference, A plus A plus c minus a minus
c minus a. That simplifies to A plus c minus c plus a, which is two a. Now I'll focus on
a point on the right branch, I'll actually write a formula for its distance to this point.
That's the distance formula, it's going to be x minus negative c squared plus y minus
zero squared. That's the longer difference distance. Now I subtract the shorter distance,
which is the distance to this focus. And they're the distance formula gives me x minus c squared
plus y minus zero squared. That should always equal to A for any point on that right branch.
I'll clean up the inside of the square roots a little bit. After that a chunk of algebra,
which I won't do here allows you to simplify this equation to see squared minus a squared
times x squared minus a squared y squared equals a squared times c squared minus a squared.
Since this expression, c squared minus a squared is appearing a couple times here, I'm going
to give it a new name, I'm going to let b squared b c squared minus a squared. Now I
can rewrite my equation as b squared x squared minus a squared y squared equals a squared
b squared. And dividing both sides by a squared b squared, you'll have the equation x squared
over a squared minus y squared over b squared equals one. In this equation, notice that
a represents the distance from the center to a vertex. The quantity C is not directly
in this equation, but it's related to a and b by this equation, which can also be rewritten
as c squared equals a squared plus b squared. Or if you prefer, a squared equals c squared
minus b squared. I remember this one. And remember that C, which is the distance from
the center to the focus is the largest of the three quantities A, B, and C. So you might
be wondering, Well, what is B represent? Well, I'm going to draw a box, whose center is at
the center of my parabola that stretches out in a from either direction left, right, and
stretches up by B in either direction, up and down. It turns out that the corners of
such a box will be exactly on these two asymptote lines. In other words, the slope of this asymptote,
its rise over its run is b over a. And for this asymptote that's slipping downwards.
Its rise over it's Ron is negative b over a. So I can actually write the equations of
the asymptotes. For this hyperbola, centered at the origin as y equals B over A x and y
equals negative B over A x. We did all this work for a standing up hyperbola with its
transverse axis oriented horizontally. Let me rearrange things. And we'll see what changes
if a hyperbola is oriented the other way. In this case, where we have a vertical transverse
axis, the roles of x and y are completely switched. So our equation, which we could
derive the same way, becomes y squared over a squared minus x squared over b squared equals
one, we still have the same formulas c squared equals a squared plus b squared. And the two
related formulas b squared equals c squared minus a squared, and a squared equals c squared
minus b squared. A is still the distance from the center to the vertex. And c still represents
the distance from the center to a focus. Now our box will extend up and down by a units
and left and right by b units. So this time, the slope of the asymptote, the rise over
the run is going to be a over b for the line that sloped up and negative a Overby for the
line that sloped down. This means our asymptotes, which go through the center at the origin
will be given by the equations y equals a over b x and y equals negative a over bx.
I want to point out that in this notation, a is going with x in one form of the equation
and y and the other form of the equation, but it always goes with the positive term,
the term that's added and subtracted, whereas B goes with the negative term, the term that
subtracted which term is positive there, the x squared or the Y squared determines the
orientation of the hyperbola this way or that way. So far, we've been considering only hyperbola
Due to the origin, and we had these two equations for them, if we sent her as an arbitrary point,
HK, instead, we just subtract h from the x term and subtract k from the y term. The graphs
are shifted over by age and up by K. And to get to the vertices, we just start at the
center, and go left and right, by a, or up and down by a depending on which way the hyperbola
is oriented. So the vertices here are at h plus a K, and H minus A k. Whereas over here,
the vertices are at h, k plus a and h, k minus a. To get to the focuses, we have to go over
by C, or up and down by c, where c squared equals a squared plus b squared. Finally,
the asymptotes still have the same slopes as before. But this time, they have to go
through the center, which is at h k instead of 00. Their equations are going to be given
by y minus k equals B over A x minus h. And y minus k is negative B over A x minus h,
or with the other orientation, the analogous thing y minus k equals a over b x minus h,
and y minus k equals A over B, negative a over b, x minus h. We've done all the abstract
theory, let's do one example with numbers. If we're given this hyperbola, we can read
off its center as six, negative three. Since the x term is positive, I'm gonna let A be
the square root of four, and B will be the square root of 25. Since the x term is positive,
and the y term is negative, the hyperbola is going to be oriented standing up like this.
With a horizontal transverse axis, the distance from the center to each vertex is given by
the number A, which is two. So the left vertex will have coordinates for negative three,
and the right vertex will have coordinates eight, negative three. To find the full side,
I need to figure out c squared, which is a squared plus b squared, or four plus 2529.
So C is the square root of 29. I'll sketch ballpark position of my first eye here, and
the coordinates are going to be at let's see, the center is six, so six minus square 29,
same y coordinate of negative three, and the six plus squared of 29 negative three. Finally,
the asymptotes will form an X going through the center with slope given by B over A, which
is five has and negative b over a negative five halves. The equations for those lines
will be y plus three, coming from the center equals five halves x minus six, and y plus
three equals negative five halves x minus six. This gives a decent rough sketch of the
hyperbola. If I want to be a little more accurate, I could also plot some points by plugging
in values of x and solving for y or vice versa. In this video, we gave two equations for hyperbolas.
Which one you use depends on how the hyperbola is oriented. A has to do with the distance
between the center and the vertex, the number c, which can be figured out from the equation
c squared equals a squared plus b squared, is going to represent the distance from the
center to the focus. And B and A together help determine the slope of the asymptotes.
This video introduces the idea of polar coordinates. Polar Coordinates give an alternative way
of describing the location of points on the plane. Instead of describing a point in terms
of its x and y coordinates, those are the Cartesian coordinates of the point. When using
polar coordinates, we instead describe the point in terms of radius r, and an angle theta.
r is the distance of the point from the origin and theta is the angle that radius line makes
with the positive x axis. Let's plot these points given in polar coordinates. So the
eight here is the value of the radius, and the negative two thirds pi is the value of
the angle theta. The negative angle means that I need to go clockwise from the positive
x axis, instead of counterclockwise, like I normally would for a positive angle. So
here, a negative two thirds pi means that I need to go to this line right here. And
the eight of for the radius means I need to go eight lines out from the origin. So my
point should be around right here. The next point has a radius of five and an angle of
three pi. The angle of positive three pi means that I go counterclockwise starting at the
positive x axis, here, I've gone around by two pi. And here, I've got an extra pi to
make three pi. Now the radius of five means I need to go five units out from the origin.
So that puts me about right here. Notice that I could have also labeled this point with
the polar coordinates of five Pi, there's more than one way to assign polar coordinates
to a point. The next point has an angle of pi over four, and a radius of negative 12.
The negative radius means that I need to jump to the other side of the circle before I plot
the point. In other words, instead of plotting the point at an angle of pi over four and
a radius of 12, which would be about right here, I go to the opposite side of the circle,
and plotted at the same distance from the origin, but 180 degrees or pi radians around
the circle over here. Now I could have also labeled this point using a positive radius
of 12. And using an angle of pi over four plus pi, or five pi over four. And in general,
a point with polar coordinates of negative r theta means the same point as the point
with polar coordinates r, theta plus pi, adding pi just makes us jump around to the opposite
side of the circle. To convert between polar and Cartesian coordinates, it's handy to use
the following equations. First, x is equal to r cosine theta, y is equal to r sine theta
r squared is equal to x squared plus y squared, which means that R is plus or minus the square
root of x squared plus y squared. And tangent theta is equal to y divided by x. Let's see
where these equations come from. If we draw a point with coordinates, x, y, and draw lines
to make a right triangle, the height of that triangle is y, the length of the base is x.
And the high partners has length r, theta is the measure of this interior angle. From
trig, we know that cosine theta is equal to adjacent over high partners. So that's x over
r, which means that x is equal to r cosine theta. Similarly, sine theta is opposite over
hypotenuse, that's y over r, which means that y is equal to r sine theta. That gives us
the first two equations. The Pythagorean Theorem tells us that x squared plus y squared is
equal to r squared. And that gives us the third equation. Finally, tangent theta is
opposite over adjacent. So that's y over x, which is the fourth equation. To convert five,
negative pi over six from polar to Cartesian coordinates, we just use the fact that x equals
r cosine theta, and y equals r sine theta. So in this case, x is equal to five times
cosine of negative pi over six, that's five times square root of three over two, and y
is equal to five sine negative pi over six. So that's equal to negative five halves to
convert negative one, negative one From Cartesian to polar coordinates, we know that negative
one and negative one are x and y values. So we need to use the fact that r squared is
x squared plus y squared, that is r squared is negative one squared plus negative one
squared are two. Also, tangent theta is y over x, so that's negative one over negative
one, or one. Now there's several values of r and theta that satisfy these equations are
could be squared of two, or negative the square root of two, and theta could be Pi over four,
or five pi over four. Or we could add multiples of two pi to either of these answers. But
not all combinations of r and theta, get us to the right point. The point with Cartesian
coordinates negative one negative one lies in the third quadrant. But if we use a theta
value of say, pi over four and an R value of square root of two, that would get us to
the first quadrant. So instead, we need to use the polar coordinates of square root of
two and five pi over four. Or if we prefer, negative square root of two, and pi over four.
We could also add any multiple of two pi to either of these values of theta, and get yet
another way of representing the point and polar coordinates. This video talked about
polar coordinates, and converting between Cartesian coordinates and polar coordinates,
using some familiar equations from trig. This video introduces the idea of parametric equations,
instead of describing a curve as y equals f of x, we can describe the x coordinates
and y coordinates separately in terms of a third variable t, usually thought of as time.
so we can write x as a function of t, and y as a separate function of t. This is especially
useful as a way to describe curves that don't satisfy the vertical line test, and therefore
can't be described traditionally as functions of y in terms of x. A Cartesian equation for
a curve is an equation in terms of x and y only. parametric equations for a curve give
both x and y as functions of a third variable, usually T. The third variable is called the
parameter. That's our first example, let's graph the parametric equations given here
on an x y coordinate axis. Well, we'll do this by finding x and y coordinates that correspond
to the same value of t. For example, when t is negative two, you can calculate that
x by plugging in negative two for t gives you five and why, when you plug in negative
two for t gives you eight. Please pause the video for a moment and fill in some additional
values of x and y. For some additional values of t. Your chart should look like this. And
when we plot the XY pairs and connect the dots, we get something like this. It says
this point over here corresponds to a T value of negative two. And this point over here
corresponds to the t value of two. So if we think of t as time, we're traversing the curve
in this direction. To find a Cartesian equation for this curve, we need to eliminate the variable
t from these equations. One way to do this is to solve for t and one equation, say the
first equation. So two t is equal to one minus x, which means that t is one half minus x
over two, then we can plug that expression for t into the second equation and get y equals
one half minus x over two squared plus four, which simplifies to the quadratic equation,
y equals 1/4 X squared minus one half x plus 17 fourths. Let's try some more examples.
A table of values for the first example helps us draw the familiar graph of a circle of
radius one. This should come as no surprise since the equations x equals cosine t and
y equals sine t are familiar from trig as a way of describing the x&y coordinates of
a point on the unit circle. Notice that when t equals zero, our curve lies on the positive
x axis. And as t increases from zero to two pi, we traverse the curve once in the counterclockwise
direction. A Cartesian equation for this unit circle is given by the equation x squared
plus y squared equals one. This follows from the trig identity cosine squared t plus sine
squared t equals one by substituting in X for cosine t, and y for sine t. Please pause
the video for a moment to graph the second curve and rewrite it as a Cartesian equation.
The table of values should help you see that the graph is again a unit circle. But this
time, as t increases from zero to two pi, we actually traverse the circle twice in the
clockwise direction, I'll draw this with a double arrow going clockwise. The Cartesian
equation for this graph is still x squared plus y squared equals one. And so we found
two different parameterizations. For the same graph on the X Y axis. Let's take a look at
the third equation. There's no interval value specified for t here. So let's just assume
that t can be any real number. Now as T ranges from negative infinity to infinity, our Y
values, which are given by cosine t, oscillate between one and negative one. Our x values
are always the square of our Y values. So the graph of this curve has to lie on the
graph of x equals y squared, which is a sideways parabola. But a parametrically defined curve
doesn't cover this whole parabola. Remember that y is given by cosine of t. So y can only
range between negative one and one. And so we're only getting the portion of the parabola
that I shade in here. As t varies from say, zero to pi, I traverse this parabola one time.
And then as t goes from pi to two pi, I go back again in the other direction. And as
T continues to increase, I traverse this parabola infinitely many times. The Cartesian equation
for this curve is the equation x equals y squared with the restriction that y is between
negative one and one. We've seen several examples where we went from parametric equations to
Cartesian equations. Now let's start with a Cartesian equation and rewrite it as a parametric
equation. In this example, y is already given as a function of x. So an easy way to parameterize.
This curve is to just let x equal t. And then y is equal to the square root of t squared
minus t, substituting in T for x, the domain restriction in terms of x just translates
into a restriction in terms of t. I call this the copycat parameterization. Since we've
successfully introduced the new variable t, but T just copies, whatever x does. In the
second example, we could try setting x equal to t, then we get 25 t squared plus 36. Y
squared is equal to 900. and solving for y, we'd have y squared equals 900 minus 25 t
squared over 36. So why is plus or minus the square root of this quantity? This is a very
awkward looking expression. In fact, why is that even a function of t here because of
the plus and minus signs. So let's look for a better way to parameterize this curve. Because
of the x squared and the y squared, this equation is a good candidate for parameterizing using
sine and cosine. In fact, if we divide both sides of the equation by 900, we get 25x squared
over 900 plus 36. Y squared over 900 is equal to one, which simplifies to x squared over
36 plus y squared over 25 is equal to one. If I rewrite this as x over six squared plus
y or five squared equals one, then I can set x over six equal to cosine of t, and y over
five equal to sine of t. And I can see that for any value of t, x over six and y over
five will satisfy this equation, simply because cosine squared plus sine squared equals one.
This gives me the parameterization x equals six cosine of t, y equals five sine of t,
which is a handy way to describe any lips. As a final example, let's describe a general
circle of radius r, and center HK. For any point, x, y on the circle, we know that the
distance from that point x y to the center of the circle is equal to r. So using the
distance formula, we know that the square root of x minus h squared plus y minus k squared
has to equal our squaring both sides, this gives us the equation for the circle in Cartesian
coordinates. So for example, if our circle has radius five, and has Center at the point,
negative 317, then its equation would be x minus negative three, that's x plus three
squared plus y minus 17 squared is equal to 25. One way to find the equation of a general
circle in parametric equations, is to start with the unit circle and work our way up.
We know that the unit circle with radius one centered at the origin is given by the equation
x equals cosine t, and y equals sine t. If we want a circle of radius r centered around
the origin instead, then we need to expand everything by a factor of R. So we multiply
our x and y coordinates by R. If we now want the center to be at HK instead of at the origin,
then we need to add h to our x coordinates and add K to all our Y coordinates. This gives
us the general equation for a circle in parametric equations. to match the Cartesian equation
above, we can write our same example circle and parametric equations as x equals five
cosine t minus three, y equals five sine t plus 17. In this video, we translated back
and forth in between Cartesian equations and parametric equations with a special emphasis
on the equations for circles. This video is about the difference quotient, and the average
rate of change. These are topics that are related to the concept of derivative and calculus.
For function y equals f of x, like the function whose graph right here, a secant line is a
line that stretches between two points on the graph of the function. I'm going to label
this x value as a and this x value as B. So this point here on the graph is going to have
an x value of a and a y value given by f of a, the second point will have x value B and
Y value f of b. Now the average rate of change for a function on the interval from a to b
can be defined as the slope of the secant line between the two points A F of A and B
f P. in symbols, that slope m is the rise over the run, or the change in y over the
change in x, which is the difference in Y coordinates f of b minus F of A over the difference
in x coordinates b minus a. So this is the average rate of change. To put this in context,
if for example, f of x represents the height of a tree. And x represents time in years,
then f of b minus f of a represents a difference in height, or the amount the tree grows. And
B minus A represents a difference in in years, so a time period. So this average rate of
change is the amount the tree grows in a certain time period. For example, if it grows 10 inches
in two years, that would be 10 inches per two years, or five inches per year would be
its average rate of change its average rate of growth, let's compute the average rate
of change for the function f of x equals square root of x on the interval from one to four.
So the average rate of change is f of four minus f of one over four minus one, well,
f of four is the square root of four of one's a square root of one. So that's going to be
two minus one over three or 1/3. Instead of calling these two locations on the x axis,
a and b, this time, I'm going to call the first location, just x and the second location,
x plus h. The idea is that h represents the horizontal distance between these two locations
on the x axis. In this notation, if I want to label this point on the graph of y equals
f of x, it'll have an x coordinate of x and a y coordinate of f of x. The second point
will have an x coordinate of x plus h, and a y coordinate of f of x plus h. a difference
quotient is simply the average rate of change using this x x plus h notation. So a different
version represents the average rate of change of a function, f of x on the interval from
x to x plus h. Equivalent way, the difference quotient represents the slope of the secant
line for the graph of y equals f of x between the points with coordinates x, f of x, and
x plus h, f of x plus h. Let's work out a formula for the difference quotient. Remember
that the formula for the average rate of change could be written as f of b minus F of A over
B minus A, where a and b are the two locations on the x axis. But now I'm calling instead
of a I'm using x instead of B, I'm using x plus h. So I can rewrite this average rate
of change as f of x plus h minus f of x over x plus h minus x. That simplifies a little
bit on the denominator. Because x plus h minus x, I can cancel the Xs, and I get the difference
quotient formula f of x plus h minus f of x over h. The quantity h on this nominator
It looks like a single entity, but it still represents a difference in x values. Let's
find and simplify the difference quotient for this function given first, or write down
the general formula for the difference quotient. That's f of x plus h minus f of x over h.
I'm going to compute f of x plus h first, I do this by shoving in x plus h, everywhere
I see an x in the formula for the function, that's going to give me two times x plus h
squared minus x plus h plus three. Notice how I use parentheses here. That's important
because I need to make sure I shove in the entire x plus h for x. So the entire x plus
h needs to be subtracted, not just the x part, so the parentheses are mandatory. Similarly,
the parentheses here signal that the entire x plus h is squared as it needs to be. I mean
going to go ahead and simplify a bit right now. I can multiply out the x plus h squared,
I can go ahead and distribute the negative sign. So if I multiply out, I'm gonna get
X squared plus X h plus h x plus h squared. Now I can distribute the two to get 2x squared
plus 2x H plus two h x plus two h squared minus x minus h plus three, these two terms
are actually the same, I can add them up to get 4x H. And I think that's as simple as
I can get that part. Now I'm going to write out F of x plus h minus f of x. So that's
going to be this thing right here, minus f of x. Again, I need to put the F of X formula
in parentheses to make sure I subtract the whole thing. I'll distribute the negative.
And now I noticed that a bunch of things cancel out. So the 2x squared and the minus 2x squared
add to zero, the minus x and the x add to zero, and the three and the minus three add
to zero. So I'm left with 4x H plus two h squared minus h. Finally, I'll write out the
whole difference quotient by dividing everything by H. I can simplify this further, because
notice that there's an H in every single term of the numerator. If I factor out this H,
H times 4x, plus two h minus one divided by h, these two H's cancel, and I'm left with
a difference quotient of 4x plus two h minus one. This difference quotient will become
important in calculus, when we calculate a difference quotient for smaller and smaller
values of h, eventually letting h go to zero and ending up with an expression that has
no H's in it and represents the derivative or slope of the function itself. In this video,
we use the formula f of b minus F of A over B minus A to calculate an average rate of
change and the related formula f of x plus h minus f of x over h to calculate and simplify
a difference quotient 

Transcript for: Calculus 1 - Full College Course
This video is about working with rational
expressions. A rational expression is a fraction, usually with variables in it, something like
x plus two over x squared minus three is a rational expression. In this video, we'll
practice adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing rational expressions, and simplifying
them to lowest terms. We'll start with simplifying to lowest terms. Recall, if you have a fraction
with just numbers in it something like 21 over 45, we can reduce it to lowest terms
by factoring the numerator and factoring the denominator and then canceling common factors.
So in this example, the three is cancel, and our fraction reduces to seven over 15. If
we want to reduce rational expression with variables and add to lowest terms, we proceed
the same way. First, we'll factor the numerator, that's three times x plus two, and then factor
the denominator. In this case of factors 2x plus two times x plus two, we could also write
that as x plus two squared. Now we cancel the common factors. And we're left with three
over x plus two. Definitely a simpler way of writing that rational expression. Now next,
let's practice multiplying and dividing. Recall that if we multiply two fractions with just
numbers in them, we simply multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. So in this
case, we would get four times two over three times five or 8/15. If we want to divide two
fractions, like in the second example, then we can rewrite it as multiplying by the reciprocal
of the fraction on the denominator. So here, we get four fifths times three halves, and
that gives us 12 tenths. But actually, we could reduce that fraction to six fifths,
we use the same rules when we compute the product or quotient of two rational expressions
with variables on them. Here, we're trying to divide to rational expressions. So instead,
we can multiply by the reciprocal, I call this flipping and multiplying. And now we
just multiply the numerators. And multiply the denominators. It might be tempting at
this point to multiply out to distribute out the numerator and the denominator. But actually,
it's better to leave it in this factored form and factored even more completely. That way,
we'll be able to reduce the rational expression to cancel the common factors. So let's factor
even more the x squared plus x factors as x times x plus one, and x squared minus 16.
And that's a difference of two squares, that's x plus four times x minus four, the denominator
is already fully factored, so we'll just copy it over. And now we can cancel common factors
here and here, and we're left with x times x minus four. This is our final answer. Adding
and subtracting fractions is a little more complicated because we first have to find
a common denominator. A common denominator is an expression that both denominators divided
into, it's usually best of the long run to use the least common denominator, which is
the smallest expression that both denominators divided into. In this example, if we just want a common
denominator, we could use six times 15, which is 90 because both six and 15 divided evenly
into 90. But if we want the least common denominator, the best way to do that is to factor the two
denominators. So six is two times 315 is three times five, and then put together only the
factors we need for both six and 15 to divide our numbers, so if we just use two times three
times five, which is 30. We know that two times three will divide it and three times
five will also divide it and we won't be able to get a denominator any smaller because we
need the factor of two three and five, in order to ensure both these numbers divided,
once we have our least common denominator, we can rewrite each of our fractions in terms
of that denominator. So seven, six, I need to get a 30 in the denominator, so I'm going
to multiply that by five over five, and multiply by the factors that are missing from the current
denominator in order to get my least common denominator of 30. For the second fraction,
for 1515 times two is 30. So I'm going to multiply by two over two, I can rewrite this
as 3530 s minus 830 s. And now that I have a common denominator, I can just subtract
my two numerators. And I get 27/30. If I factor, I can reduce this to three squared over two
times five, which is nine tenths. The process for finding the sum of two rational expressions
with variables in them follows the exact same process. First, we have to find the least
common denominator, I'll do that by factoring the two denominators. So 2x plus two factors
as two times x plus 1x squared minus one, that's a difference of two squares. So that's
x plus one times x minus one. Now for the least common denominator, I'm going to take
all the factors, I need to get an expression that each of these divides into, so I need
the factor two, I need the factor x plus one, and I need the factor x minus one, I don't
have to repeat the factor x plus one I just need to have at one time. And so I will get
my least common denominator two times x plus one times x minus one, I'm not going to bother
multiplying this out, it's actually better to leave it in factored form to help me simplify
later. Now I can rewrite each of my two rational expressions by multiplying by whatever's missing
from the denominator in terms of the least common denominator. So what I mean is, I can
rewrite three over 2x plus two, I'll write the 2x plus two is two times x plus one, I'll
write it in factored form. And then I noticed that compared to the least common denominator,
I'm missing the factor of x minus one. So I multiply the numerator and the denominator
by x minus one I just needed in the denominator, but I can't get away with just multiplying
by the denominator without changing my expression, I have to multiply by it on the numerator
and the denominator. So I'm just multiplying by one and a fancy form and not changing the
value here. So now I do the same thing for the second rational expression. I'll write
the denominator in factored form to make it easier to see what's missing from the denominator.
What's missing in this denominator, compared to my least common denominator is just the
factor two. So I multiply the numerator and the denominator by two. Now I can rewrite
everything. So the first rational expression becomes three times x minus one over two times
x plus 1x minus one, and the second one becomes five times two over two times x plus 1x minus
one, notice that I now have a common denominator. So I can just add together my numerators.
So I get three times x minus one plus 10 over two times x plus 1x minus one. I'd like to
simplify this. And the best way to do that is to leave the denominator in factored form.
But I do have to multiply out the numerator so that I can add things together. So I get
3x minus three plus 10 over two times x plus 1x minus one, or 3x plus seven over two times
x plus 1x minus one. Now 3x plus seven doesn't factor. And there's therefore no factors that
I can cancel out. So this is already reduced. As much as it can be. This is my final answer. In this video, we saw how to simplify rational
expressions to lowest terms by factoring and canceling common factors. We also saw how
to multiply rational expressions by multiplying the numerator and multiplying the denominator
had divide rational expressions by flipping and multiplying, and how to add and subtract
rational expressions by writing them in terms of the least common denominator. This video
is about the difference quotient and the average rate of change. These are topics that are
related to the concept of derivative and calculus. For function y equals f of x, like the function
whose graph right here, a secant line is a lie. that stretches between two points on
the graph of the function. I'm going to label this x value has a, and this x value as B.
So this point here on the graph is going to have an x value of a, and a y value given
by f of a, the second point will have x value B and Y value, f of b. Now the average rate
of change for a function on the interval from a to b can be defined as the slope have the
secret line between the two points A, F of A and B, F of B. In symbols, that slope m
is the rise over the run, or the change in y over the change in x, which is the difference
in Y coordinates f of b minus F of A over the difference in x coordinates b minus a.
So this is the average rate of change. To put this in context, if for example, f of
x represents the height of a tree, and x represents time in years, then f of b minus f of a represents
a difference in height, or the amount the tree grows. And B minus A represents a difference
in in years, so a time period. So this average rate of change is the amount the tree grows
in a certain time period. For example, if it grows 10 inches in two years, that would
be 10 inches per two years, or five inches per year would be its average rate of change
its average rate of growth, let's compute the average rate of change for the function
f of x equals square root of x on the interval from one to four. So the average rate of change is f of four minus
f of one over four minus one, well, f of four is the square root of four of one's the square
root of one. So that's going to be two minus one over three or 1/3. Instead of calling
these two locations on the x axis, a and b, this time, I'm going to call the first location,
just x and the second location, x plus h. The idea is that h represents the horizontal
distance between these two locations on the x axis. In this notation, if I want to label
this point on the graph of y equals f of x, it'll have an x coordinate of x and a y coordinate
of f of x. The second point will have an x coordinate of x plus h and a y coordinate
of f of x plus h. a difference quotient is simply the average rate of change using this
x x plus h notation. So a different version represents the average rate of change of a
function, f of x on the interval from x to x plus h. Equivalent way, the difference quotient
represents the slope of the secant line for the graph of y equals f of x between the points
with coordinates x, f of x, and x plus h, f of x plus h. Let's work out a formula for
the difference quotient. Remember that the formula for the average rate of change could
be written as f of b minus F of A over B minus A, where a and b are the two locations on
the x axis. But now I'm calling instead of a I'm using x instead of B, I'm using x plus
h. So I can rewrite this average rate of change as f of x plus h minus f of x over x plus
h minus x. That simplifies a little bit on the denominator. Because x plus h minus x,
I can cancel the access and I get the difference quotient formula f of x plus h minus f of
x over h. The quantity h on denominator It looks like a single entity, but it still represents
a difference in x values. Let's find and simplify the difference quotient for this function
given first or write down the general formula for the difference quotient. That's an F of
x plus h minus f of x over h. I'm going to compute f of x plus h first, I do this by
shoving in x plus h, everywhere I see an x in the formula for the function. So that's
going to give me two times x plus h squared minus x plus h plus three. Notice how I use
parentheses here. That's important, because I need to make sure I shove in the entire
x plus h for x. So the entire x plus h needs to be subtracted, not just the x part, so
the parentheses are mandatory. Similarly, the parentheses here signal that the entire
x plus h is squared as it needs to be, I'm going to go ahead and simplify a bit right
now, I can multiply out the x plus h squared, I can go ahead and distribute the negative
sign. So if I multiply out, I'm gonna get x squared plus XH plus h x plus h squared.
Now I can distribute the two to get to x squared plus 2x H plus two h x plus two h squared
minus x minus h plus three, these two terms are actually the same, I can add them up to
get 4x H. And I think that's as simple as I can get that part. Now, I'm going to write
out F of x plus h minus f of x. So that's going to be this thing right here, minus f
of x. Again, I need to put the F of X formula in parentheses to make sure I subtract the
whole thing. I'll distribute the negative. And now I noticed that a bunch of things cancel
out. So the 2x squared and the minus 2x squared add to zero, the minus x and the x add to
zero, and the three and the minus three, add to
zero. So I'm left with 4x H plus two h squared minus h. Finally, I'll write out the whole
difference quotient by dividing everything by H. I can simplify this further, because
notice that there's an H in every single term of the numerator. If I factor out this H,
H times 4x, plus two h minus one divided by h, these two H's cancel, and I'm left with
a difference quotient of 4x plus two h minus one. This difference quotient will become
important in calculus, when we calculate the difference quotient for smaller and smaller
values of h, eventually letting h go to zero, and ending up with an expression that has
no H's in it, and represents the derivative or slope of the function itself. In this video,
we use the formula f of b minus F of A over B minus A to calculate an average rate of
change, and the related formula f of x plus h minus f of x over h to calculate and simplify
a difference quotient. This video will introduce the idea of limits through some graphs and
examples. When I worked in San Francisco, I used to eat at Julia sushi and salad bar
that had an interesting price structure, the food there cost $10 a pound. But if you happen
to load up your plate to exactly one pound, you got a free lunch. So let's let y equals
f of x represent the price of your lunch in dollars as a function of its weight x in pounds.
And I want to write an equation to describe f of x as a piecewise defined function. It
makes sense to use a piecewise defined function. Because there are two situations, the weight
x could be exactly one pound, or it could be different from one pound. If the weight
is exactly one pound, then f of x The price is zero. But if x is different from a pound,
then the price is 10 times x as a graph, my function is going to follow the line y equals
10x. But when x is exactly one, my function is going to have a value of zero and not 10.
The open circle here represents a hole or a place where a point is missing on the graph.
Now when x is near one, but not equal to one, then the F of X values that is the y values
are very close to 10. In the language of limits, we say that the limit as x approaches one
of F have x is equal to Ted. More informally, we can write, as x approaches one, f of x
approaches 10. Notice that the value of f at one is actually equal to zero, not 10.
And so the limit of f of x as x goes to one, and the value of f at one, are not equal.
This illustrates the important fact that the limit here as x goes to one doesn't care about
the value of f, at one, it only cares about the value of f, when x is near one, in general,
for any function f of x, and for real numbers, a and L, the limit as x goes to a of f of
x equals L means that f of x gets arbitrarily close to L, as x gets arbitrarily close to
a, in other words, as x heads towards a, f of x heads towards L. Let me draw this as
a picture. In this picture, I can say that the limit as x goes to a of f of x is L. Because
by taking a sufficiently small interval around a of x values, I can guarantee that my y values,
my f of x values lie in an arbitrarily small interval around L. Now the limit doesn't care
about s value at exactly a. So if I change the function, if I change the functions value
at a, or even leave the function undefined at a, the limit is still L. But the limit
does care about what happens for x values on both sides of a. If, for example, the function didn't even
exist for x values bigger than a, then we could no longer say that the limit, as x approached
a was out, the limit would not exist. In other words, the limit of f of x is L, only if the
y values are approaching now, as x approaches a from both the left and the right. For the
function g of x graph below, the limit as x goes to two of g of x does not exist. Because
the y values approach one as the x values approach two from the left and the y values
approach three, as the x values approach two from the right. Although the limit doesn't
exist, we can say that the left sided limit exists. And we write this as limit as x goes
to two from the left of g of x is equal to one. The superscript minus sign here means
that x is going to two from the left side. In other words, the x values are less than
two and approaching two. Similarly, we can talk about right sided limits. In this example,
the limit as x goes to two from the right side of g of x is three. And here, the superscript
plus side means that we're approaching two from the right side. In other words, our x
values are greater than to and approaching to. In general, the limit as x goes to a minus
of f of x equals L means that f of x approaches L, as x approaches a from the left, and the
limit as x goes to a plus of f of x equals our means that f of x approaches our as x
approaches a from the right limits from the left or from the right are also called one
sided limits. In this last example, let's look at the behavior of y equals h of x graph
below when x is near negative two. As x approaches negative two from the right, our Y values
are getting arbitrarily large, larger than any real number we might choose. We can write
this in terms of limits by saying the limit as x goes to negative two from the right of
h of x is equal to infinity. As x approaches negative two from the left, the y values are
getting smaller. In fact, they go below any negative real number we might choose. In terms
of limits, we can say that the limit as x goes to negative two from the left of h of
x is negative infinity. In this example, the limit of h of x as x goes to negative two,
not specifying from the left or the right means we have to approach negative two from
both sides. And so this limit does not exist, because the limits from the left and the limit
from the right are heading in opposite directions. I want to mention that some people say that
the limits from the right and the limits from the left also do not exist. Because the functions
don't approach any finite number. I prefer to say that these limits do not exist as a
finite number. But they do exist as infinity and negative infinity. This video introduced
the idea of limits, and one sided limits and infinite limits. This video gives some examples
of when limits fail to exist. For this function, f of x graph below, let's look at the behavior
of f of x in terms of limits, as x approaches negative one, one, and two. Let's start with
x approaching negative one. When x approaches negative one from the last, the y value is
going to be approaching about one half. When x approaches negative one from the right,
the y values sandvi, approaching one. So when x approaches negative one, and we don't specify
from either the left or the right, we can only say that the limit does not exist, because
these two limits from the left and right are not equal. Now let's look at the limit as x is approaching
one. This time, we approach from the left, we get a limiting y value of two, we approach
from the right, the y values are going towards two. So both of these left and right limits
are equal to and therefore the limit as x goes to one of
f of x equals two. That's true, even though f of one f of one itself does not exist. The
limit doesn't care what happens at exactly x equals one just what happens when x is near
one. Finally, let's look at the limit as x goes
to two. So here on the left side, the limit is going to negative infinity. And on the
right side, it's negative infinity. So we can say the limit as x goes to two is negative
infinity. Or we can also say that the limit as x goes to two does not exist. This is the
correct answer. This is a better answer because it carries more information. What values of
x does a limit of f of x fail to exist? Well, let's see. Negative one and two are the only
two values. Let's talk about the ways that limits can fail to exist, we've seen at least
a couple different ways. So we've seen examples where the limit from the left is not equal
to the limit from the right. Here's our number a where we're calculating the limit at. So
that's one example we've seen. We've also seen examples where they're vertical asymptotes.
There's a vertical asymptote here at a, that limit fails to exist because of the unbounded
behavior because the y values are going off to infinity. There's one other way that limits
can fail to exist that comes up, sometimes not quite as frequently. And that's wild behavior.
Not a technical term, just to descriptive term. Let's look at an example that has this wild
behavior, forcing a limit not to exist. And the one of the most classic examples as the
limit as x goes to zero of sine pi over x or sometimes you'll see sine one over x. If
you graph this on your graphing calculator and zoom in near x equals zero, you're gonna
see something that looks roughly like this. It just keeps oscillating up and down and
up and down, as x goes towards zero As x goes towards zero, pi over x is getting bigger
and bigger. And you're going to go through these oscillations between one and negative
one for the faster and faster. From the other side, when x is negative, you'll
see a similar kind of behavior just oscillating faster and faster. As x goes to zero, here, this top values up here at one, and
the bottom value of these are all supposed to hit it negative one. Now, when you try
to decide what the limit is, as x goes to zero, well, the y values are going through
all possible real numbers and between negative one and one infinitely often as x goes to
zero, so there's no single number that the limit can settle at. And so the limit as x
goes to zero, of sine pi over x does not exist. In this video, we saw three types of examples
when limits fail to exist, they can fail to exist because the one sided limits on the
left and the right are not equal. Or they can fail to exist because of vertical asymptotes.
Also, limits can fail to exist when there's wild behavior. And the function fails to settle
down at any single value. This video is about limit laws, rules for finding the limits of
sums, differences, products, and quotients and functions. Let's start with an example.
Suppose that the limit as x goes to seven of f of x is 30. And the limit as x goes to
seven of g of x is two. What's the limit as x goes to seven of f of x divided by negative
three times g of x. Wilson's f of x is heading towards 30. And
g of x is heading towards two, it makes sense that the quotient should head towards 30 divided
by negative three times two, or negative five. in calculating this limit, by plugging in
numbers for the components, we were actually using the limit loss, which are now state.
Suppose that c is a constant, just some number, and that the limits as x goes to a of f of
x and g of x exist as finite numbers that is not as limits that are infinity or negative
infinity. Then the limit of the sum f of x plus g of x is equal to the limit of f of
x plus the limit of g of x. In other words, the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits.
Similarly, the limit of the difference is the difference of the limits. The limit of
C times f of x is just c times the limit of f of x. And the limit of the product is the
product of the limits. The limit of the quotient is the quotient of the limits, provided that
the limit of g of x is not equal to zero. Since we can't divide by zero. Let's use these
limit laws in an example, to find the limit as x goes to two of x squared plus 3x plus
six divided by x plus nine. Well, the limit rule about quotients allows us to rewrite
this limit of a quotient as a quotient of limits, provided that the limits of the numerator
and denominator exist, and that the limit of the denominator is not zero. But we'll
see in a moment that these conditions do in fact hold. Next, we can use the limit rule
about sums to rewrite the numerator as a sum of limits. And we can rewrite the limit in
the denominator also as a sum of limits. Next, we can use the limit rule about products to
rewrite the limit of x squared as the square of the limit. That's because x squared is
really x times x. And so the limit of x squared is really the limit of x times x, which by
the product rule is a limit of x times the limit of x, which is the limit of x quantity
squared. Going back to the original problem, we can now use the limit rule about multiplying
by a constant to rewrite the limit of three times x as three times the limit of x. And
I'll just carry the rest forward. Now that we've got things broken down into bite sized
pieces, we can start evaluating some limits. Notice that the limit as x goes to two of
x is just two, because as x heads towards 2x, heads towards two, so we can replace all
these limits of access by just the number two. So we get two squared plus three times
two. Now notice that the limit as x goes to two of six, well, six doesn't have any x's
in it. So as x two heads towards to six days at six, and the limit here is just six. So
in my original problem, I can replace the set limit of six with six. And on the denominator
here, I get to plus nine. And after a little arithmetic, this simplifies to 16/11. Notice
that we could have gotten this answer a lot faster, just by substituting in the value
of two into our original expression. And in fact, that's the beauty of the lemon laws,
they allow us to evaluate limits of rational functions, just by plugging in the number
that x is going towards, as long as plugging in that number doesn't make the denominator
zero. It's not nearly so simple. When plugging in the value does make the done at zero. And
in the future, we'll build up a bunch of algebraic techniques for handling the situation. In
this video, we've talked about the limit loss. It's important to note, these limit laws only
apply if the limits of the component functions actually exist as finite numbers. If the limit of one or both of the component
functions don't exist, then a limit rules just simply don't apply. And instead, we have
to use other techniques to try to evaluate the limit of a sum, difference product or
quotient. This video is about the squeeze theorem, which is another method for finding
limits. Let's start with an example. Suppose we have a function g of x. We don't know much
about it. But we do know that for x value is near one, g of x is greater than or equal
to four times the square root of x drawn here in red, and less than or equal to 3x squared
minus 4x plus five, drawn here in blue. So on the picture, G has to lie between the red
and the blue curves for x values near one, it could look something like this. What can
we say about the limit of g of x as x goes to one? Well, if you notice, the red curve
and the blue curve have the exact same limit of four as x goes to one. And since the green
curve is squeezed in between the red and the blue curve, its limit must also be for this
example as a special case of the squeeze theorem. Now, let's say the squeeze theorem in general,
suppose that we have three functions, f of x g of x and h of x. And let's suppose that
f of x is less than or equal to g of x, which is less than or equal to h of x, at least
for x values near some number A. this inequality doesn't necessarily have to hold for x equal
to a, because we're going to be talking about limits. And limits don't care what happens
when x is exactly a just when x is near a. Let's suppose also, that like in the previous
example, f of x and h of x have the exact same limit as x approaches a. So we're going
to suppose that the limit as x goes to a of f of x is equal to the limit as x goes to
a of h of x. And we'll call this limit. Now. The picture looks a lot like the previous
example. Again, it doesn't matter exactly what happens at x equals a, for example, g
of x could have a hole there. And its value could be for example, way up here. Since g
of x is trapped here in between f of x and h of x, which both have the same limit l at
a, we can conclude that the limit as x goes to a of g of x is equal to l also. And that's
the squeeze theorem, also known as the pinching theorem, and the sandwich theorem, three very
descriptive names that capture the idea of geovax being trapped here, in between lower
and upper bounds. Now let's use the squeeze there. To find the limit as x goes to zero
of x squared sine one over x. Now, you might remember that sine one over x by itself has
this crazy oscillating behavior. In fact, the limit as x goes to zero of sine one over
x does not exist, because the function never settles down to a single finite value. At
first glance, you might think the limit of x squared sine of one over x also wouldn't
exist. In fact, it's tempting to try to use the product rule and say that the limit of
the product is the product of the limits. But in fact, the product rule only applies
when the component limits both exist. And since the second limit doesn't exist, the
product rule tells us absolutely nothing about whether the limit that we're interested in
exists or doesn't. So we can't use the product rule. But it turns out, we can use the squeeze
theorem. Now this example is a little trickier than the first example, because in the first
example, we were told what the upper and lower bounding functions should be. And in this
example, we have to come up with. But if we look at a graph of x squared sine one over
x, we can see that it does seem to be trapped in an envelope here. Let's use algebra to see what those two bounding
functions might be. Now we know that sine of one over x is always between one and negative
one, just because sine of anything has between one and negative one. And if we multiply this
whole inequality by x squared, we get minus x squared is less than or equal to x squared,
sine one over x, which is less than or equal to x squared. Notice that x squared is always
positive, so we don't have to worry about flipping any of the inequality signs when
we multiply by this positive number. So x squared and minus x squared are good bounding
functions. And if we notice that the limit as x goes to zero of x squared is zero, and
the limit as x goes to zero of negative x squared is also zero, we can conclude by the
squeeze theorem, that the limit as x goes to zero of x squared, sine of one over x is
also zero, because it squeezed in between these two functions with the same limit. the
squeeze theorem is a great trick for evaluating limits when you happen to have a function
that you're interested in, trapped in between two other functions with the same limit. The
example in this video is a classic example, where we have a crazy oscillating trig function,
multiplied by a power of x, that x is one of our bounding functions. In this video,
we'll compute a bunch of limits using algebraic tricks. All these limits are of the zero over
zero indeterminate form kind. Recall that this means that the limits are of the form
the limit of f of x over g of x where the limit of f of x equals zero and the limit
of g of x also equals zero. For a first example, let's look at the limit as x goes to one of
x cubed minus one over x squared minus one. Notice that the numerator and the denominator
are both going to zero as x goes to one. To calculate this limit, we want to simplify
this expression. And one way to simplify it is to factor it. So let's rewrite this as
the limit as x goes to one of x minus one times x squared plus x plus one. We're factoring
the numerator here is a difference of cubes. We can also factor the denominator as a difference
of squares, x minus one times x plus one. Now, as long as x is not equal to one, we
can cancel out these two factors of x minus one. And so the limit of this expression is
just the same as the limit of this expression. Now we can just plug in one, because plugging
in one gives us a numerator of three and a denominator of two. And that way, we've evaluated
our limits. Next, let's look at the limit of five minus z quantity squared minus 25.
All divided by z. Once again, when we plug in x equals zero in the numerator, we get
zero and then nominator we also get zero. This time instead of factoring, the trick
is going to be to multiply out. So let's rewrite this limit as the limit as t goes to zero of 25 minus 10 z plus z squared minus 25. I just
distributed to get this expression divided by z. Since 25 minus 25 is zero, I just have
the limit as t goes to zero of negative 10 z plus c squared over z. Now what? Well, I could factor out the Z here.
One z is not zero, I can cancel here. So my original limit is the same as this limit.
Plugging in z equals zero, I just get negative 10 as my answer. This third example is also
a situation where the numerator is going to zero, and the denominator is also going to
zero. In this case, I'm going to try to simplify the expression by adding together the fractions
and the numerator. So I'll need a common denominator, which is r plus three, times three. So rewriting,
I get the limit of one over r plus three, I multiply that by three over three, in order
to get the appropriate common denominator, minus 1/3, which I have to multiply by R plus
three over r plus three, all that over are continuing to rewrite, I have in the numerator,
adding together these fractions mature, have the denominator of R plus three times three,
I get three minus quantity r plus three. And then this entire fraction is still divided
by our distributing the negative sign, I have three minus r minus three divided by R plus
three times three, all divided by R. three minus three is zero. So I can rewrite this
as negative r over r plus three, times three. And now instead of dividing by r, which is
r of r one, I can multiply by the reciprocal, one over R. R divided by R is one. So this
expression simplifies to negative one, over r plus three, times three. So finally, I'm
in a good position, because now I can just go ahead and let our go to zero. And by plugging
in R equals zero, I have a limit of negative one over zero plus three times three, or negative
one, nine. This example is a little tricky, because involve square roots can be hard to
deal with. Well, there's one nice trick for dealing with square roots that works here,
which is the conjugate. So I'm going to take the expression that we're given, and multiply
by the conjugate of the numerator, in this case, because the numerator is the place where
the square root is by the conjugate of A minus B, I just mean a plus b conjugate of A plus
B is a minus b. Well, of course, if I multiply on the numerator, by something, I also have
to multiply the denominator by the same thing, so that I won't alter the value of the expression.
So this limit here is equal to the limit of the expression down here that looks more complicated,
than in a moment, if we're lucky, things will clear up and become simpler. So Multiplying
the numerators across, I get the square root of x plus three squared. I get plus two times the square root of x plus three
minus two times the square root of x plus three minus four. On the denominator, I get
x times the square root of x plus three plus 2x minus the square root of x plus three minus
two. Let's see what simplifies here. So the square root of x plus three squared is just
x plus three. And I see that this expression and this expression are opposites, so they
subtract to zero here. So on the numerator, I just have x plus three, and then I still
have the minus four on the denominator, nominator looks a little messy. I'll just copy it over
for now. Okay, so on my numerator, I'm getting x minus one. Notice that when x goes to one,
that numerator is still going to zero. And in fact, as I let x go to one, that denominator,
if I plug in here, everything is gonna also cancel out to zero. So I still got a zero
over zero indeterminate form. But maybe I can use one of the previous tricks of factoring.
Because look at here, if I factor an X out of these two expressions as a square root
of x plus three out of these two expressions, and I could maybe factor a two out of these
two, factoring by grouping, let's try that. So we have x squared of x plus three times
x minus one from these two expressions, and then I have a plus two times x minus one.
From these two expressions, this is looking promising. So now I've got an x minus one
on the top. And if I factor out the x minus one from each of these two expressions, I'm
going to have an x minus one on the bottom times the square root of x plus three, plus
two. Now, for x values near one, but not equal to one, I can cancel those. And my limit simplifies
to just one over square root of x plus three plus two, plugging in one, I get a one on
the numerator, and square root of four, which is two plus two, four on the denominator,
and we have calculated this limit. Last example here, another zero over zero indeterminate
form. Anytime I see an absolute value, I'm going to want to take cases, because the absolute
value of X plus five naturally follows in the cases, if X plus five is greater than
zero, in other words, x is greater than negative five, then the absolute value of this positive
number is just itself. On the other hand, if X plus five is less
than zero, in other words, x is less than negative five, than the absolute value of
a negative number is its opposite. And we make the expression x plus five, turn it into
its opposite by putting a negative sign in front. Now let's look at one sided limits.
As x goes to negative five from the left, we have a situation where x is less than negative
five, this situation right here. And so we can rewrite the absolute value by taking the
negative of the expression. We still have a zero over zero and determinant form. But
if we use the old factoring trick, factor out a two cancel, we got the limit
of two over negative one, which is just negative two. We do the same exercise on the right side.
When we're on the right, then x is greater than negative five. So we're in this situation
here, where we can just replace the absolute value with the stuff inside and again factoring
the numerator and canceling the X plus five We just get a limit of two. So we have a left limit, and a right limit
that are different. And so in this example, the limit does not exist. So we've seen a
five different kinds of limits all of the zero or zero indeterminate form. And we've
used five different methods to evaluate them. For the first example, we use factoring. For
the second example, do the opposite of factoring, we multiplied out. For the third example,
we added together our rational expressions to simplify things. The next example uses
the old multiply by the conjugate trick. And the last example, we used cases and looked
at one sided limits. The limit law about quotients tells us that
the limit of the quotient is the question of the limit, provided that the limits of
the component functions actually exist, and that the limit of the function on the denominator
is not equal to zero. But what happens if the limit of the function on the denominator
is equal to zero? This video will begin to answer that question. In fact, there are two
different situations we'll want to consider. It could be that even though the limit on
the denominator is equal to zero, the limit on the numerator exists and is not
equal to zero. Or it could happen that both limits are zero. We'll focus on the first
situation, first starting with an example. And we'll look at the second situation later
on. In this example, the limit of the numerator,
negative 4x is just negative 12, which we can see by plugging in three for x. But the
limit as x goes to three of the denominator is zero. So we're exactly in one of these
situations where the numerator goes to a finite nonzero number, but the denominator goes to
zero. Let's see what happens as we approach three from the left first. As we approach
three from the left, x is going through numbers that are slightly less than three numbers
like 2.9 2.99 2.999, and so on. If we plug in those numbers into the expression, here
on our calculator, we didn't get answers of 116 1196, and 11,996. If even without a calculator,
we could approximate these answers pretty closely by just thinking about the fact that
since x is very close to three, the numerator is about negative four times three, so about
negative 12. The denominator 2.9 minus three is negative 0.1. That quotient of two negative
numbers gives us a positive value of 120. Similarly, we could approximate the value
when x is 2.9 times as almost negative 12 divided by 0.01, which is 1200. And approximate
the third value as 12,000. Either way, we do it exact answers on our calculator or approximations
in our head when noticing that these values are positive numbers that are getting larger
and larger as x goes towards three from the left. This makes sense. Because if we look
at our expression, as x goes towards three from the left, the numerator is getting close
to negative 12, which is a negative number. And the denominator, since x is less than
three will always be a small negative number, negative over negative is a positive. And
as x is getting really close to three, those denominators are getting smaller and therefore
the fractions are getting bigger and bigger in magnitude. So we can conclude that our
limit is positive infinity. We can make a similar argument By looking at the limit,
as x goes to three from the positive side, it's supposed to be an X minus three here.
So now x is going through a value is slightly bigger than three 3.1 3.01 3.01. And again,
we can plug directly into our calculator and figure out the answers are negative 124. Negative
1204, negative 12,004. Or we can make a similar approximating argument. This answer is approximately
negative 12 over a positive point one, which is negative 120, and so on. Like before, if
we consider the signs of our numerator and denominator, we can see that as x goes to
three, our numerator is a negative number. But our denominator is a positive number,
since we're approaching three from the right where x is bigger than three, and therefore,
our quotient is a negative number, it's still getting bigger and bigger in magnitude as
x goes towards three, because the denominator is still getting tinier and tinier, while
the numerator stays pretty close to negative 12. So in this case, we're getting a negative
number that's bigger and bigger magnitude, so that makes a limit of negative infinity.
Now, since our limit on the left is infinity, and our limit on the right is negative infinity,
the only thing we can say about the limit as x goes to three is that it does not exist. Now let's look
at another example. The limit as x goes to negative four of 5x, over the absolute value
of x plus four, notice that the limit of the numerator is just negative 20 by plugging
in negative four for x, and the limit of the denominator is zero. Because we've got an
absolute value in our expression, here, it's screaming out at us to look at cases. Remember
that the absolute value of x plus four is going to equal just x plus four, if x plus
four is positive, in other words, if x is greater than negative four, however, if x
is less than negative four, then the expression x plus four will be negative. So taking the
absolute value has to switch at sign in order to make a negative expression positive. Alright,
so that's going to come in handy when we look at the limit as x goes to negative four, from
the left, and from the right. So when we approach negative four from the left, x is going to
be less than negative four. So we're going to be in this situation here, where the absolute
value gives us the opposite sign. That means that the limit as x goes to negative four
minus of this expression, the same as the limit of 5x over negative x plus four. Now
reasoning as before, as x is going to negative four from the left, the numerator here is
a negative number. Pretty close to negative 20. The denominator, since x is less than
negative 4x plus four is negative, the negative of it is positive. So our quotient is negative.
And since denominator is getting really tiny, while the numerators will pretty level at
at negative 20. This limit is going to be bigger and bigger magnitude a limit of negative
infinity. Now let's look at the limit as x goes to negative four from the right, in this
case, x is just a little bit bigger than negative four. So we're in this case where the absolute
value doesn't change the expression. So we can rewrite this As 5x over x plus four, now the numerator is still gonna be a negative
number, the denominator, since x is slightly bigger than negative four, slightly to the
right, this expression is going to be positive number. Negative or over a positive is a negative.
And again, since the denominator is getting tiny, the fractions getting huge in magnitude.
And so this limit is negative infinity. Now, in this case, look at what's going on, we've
got a negative infinity limit on the left and a negative infinity limit on the right.
So we can conclude that the limit as x goes to negative four of 5x, over the absolute
value of x plus four is equal to negative infinity. In fact, we can confirm that by
looking at a graph. If we look, check out the graph near x equals negative four, it's
gonna look something like this, with a vertical asymptote at x equals negative four, like
expected. So we've seen that if the limit of f of x is equal to something that's not
zero, and the limit of g of x is equal to zero, then the limit of the quotient could
be negative infinity as it was in the past example. It could also be infinity, or it
could just not exist. supposed to say does not exist, if the one sided limits are infinity
on one side, and negative infinity on the other. Now, what about this second situation
that I mentioned the beginning when the limit of f of x is zero, and the limit of f of g
of x is zero? What can we say about the limit of the quotient in this situation? Well, in
fact, in this situation, the limit of the quotient, it could exist and be any finite
number, or infinity, or minus infinity, or it could not exist at all. In fact, in this
sort of situation, which is called a zero, or zero indeterminate form, anything could
happen. Which makes it in some ways the hardest, but in some ways, the most fun situation of
all. So in another video, we'll talk about techniques for dealing with 00 indeterminate
forms, and how to use algebra and other simplification techniques to evaluate these these mysterious
limits. So in this video, we've looked at the limits of quotients, when the limit of
the denominator is zero. We've done some examples when the limit of the numerator was not zero,
but the limit of the denominator was zero. And we saw that these situations corresponded
to vertical asymptotes, and gave us an answer for the limit of the quotient of infinity,
or negative infinity, or sometimes infinity on one side and negative infinity on the other.
We also hinted at fun things to come when we look at the limits in this situation when
the numerator and the denominator are both heading towards zero. And when anything can
happen. This video is about graphs and equations of lines. Here we're given the graph of a
line, we want to find the equation, one standard format for the equation of a line is y equals
mx plus b. here, m represents the slope, and B represents the y intercept, the y value,
where the line crosses the y axis, the slope is equal to the rise over the run. Or sometimes
this is written as the change in y values over the change in x values. Or in other words,
y two minus y one over x two minus x one, where x one y one and x two y two are points
on the line. While we could use any two points on the line,
to find the slope, it's convenient to use points where the x and y coordinates are integers.
That is points where the line passes through grid points. So here would be one convenient
point to use. And here's another convenient point to use. The coordinates of the first
point are one, two, and the next point this is let's say, five negative one. Now I can
find this slope by looking at the rise over the run. So as I go through a run of this
distance, I go through a rise of that distance, especially gonna be a negative rise or a fall
because my line is pointing down. So let's see counting off squares, this is a run of
1234 squares and a rise of 123. So negative three, so my slope is going to be negative
three, over four. I got that answer by counting squares. But I could have also gotten it by
looking at the difference in my y values over the difference of my x values. That is, I
could have done negative one minus two, that's from my difference in Y values, and divide
that by my difference in x values, which is five minus one, that gives me negative three
over four, as before, so my M is negative three fourths. Now I need to figure out the
value of b, my y intercept, well, I could just read it off the graph, it looks like
approximately 2.75. But if I want to be more accurate, I can again use a point that has
integer coordinates that I know it's exact coordinates. So either this point or that
point, let's try this point. And I can start off with my equation y equals mx plus b, that
is y equals negative three fourths x plus b. And I can plug in the point one, two, for
my x and y. So that gives me two equals negative three fourths times one plus b, solving for
B. Let's see that two equals negative three fourths plus b. So add three fourths to both
sides, that's two plus three fourths equals b. So b is eight fourths plus three fourths,
which is 11 fourths, which is actually just what I eyeballed it today. So now I can write
out my final equation for my line y equals negative three fourths x plus 11 fourths by
plugging in for m and b. Next, let's find the equation for this horizontal line. a horizontal
line has slope zero. So if we think of it as y equals mx plus b, m is going to be zero.
In other words, it's just y equals b, y is some constant. So if we can figure out what
that that constant y value is, it looks like it's to let's see, this three, three and a
half, we can just write down the equation directly, y equals 3.5. For a vertical line,
like this one, it doesn't really have a slope. I mean, if you tried to do the rise over the
run, there's no run. So you'd I guess you'd be divided by zero and get an infinite slope.
But But instead, we just think of it as an equation of the form x equals something. And
in this case, x equals negative two, notice that all of the points on our line have the
same x coordinate of negative two and the y coordinate can be anything. So this is how
we write the equation for a vertical line. In this example, we're not shown a graph of
the line, we're just get told that it goes through two points. But knowing that I go
through two points is enough to find the equation for the line. First, we can find the slope
by taking the difference in Y values over the difference in x values. So that's negative
three minus two over four minus one, which is negative five thirds. So we can use the
standard equation for the line, this is called the slope intercept form. And we can plug in negative five thirds. And
we can use one point, either one will do will still get the same final answer. So let's
use one two and plug that in to get two equals negative five thirds times one plus b. And
so B is two plus five thirds, which is six thirds plus five thirds, which is 11 thirds.
So our equation is y equals negative five thirds x plus 11 thirds. This is method one.
method two uses a slightly different form of the equation. It's called the point slope
form and it goes y minus y naught is equal to m times x minus x naught where x naught
Why not is a point on the line, and again is the slope. So we calculate the slope the
same way, by taking a difference in Y values over a difference in x values. But then we
can simply plug in any point. For example, the point one, two will work, we can plug
one in for x naught and two in for Y not in this point slope form, that gives us y minus
two is equal to minus five thirds x minus one. Notice that these two equations, while
they may look different, are actually equivalent. Because if I distribute the negative five
thirds, and then add the two to both sides, I get the same equation as above. So we've seen two ways of finding the equation
for the line is in the slope intercept form, and using the point slope form. In this video,
we saw that you can find the equation for a line if you know the slope. And you know
one point, you can also find the equation for the line if you know two points, because
you can use the two points to get the slope and then plug in one of those points. To figure
out the rest of the equation. We saw two standard forms for the equation of a line the slope
intercept form y equals mx plus b, where m is the slope, and B is the y intercept. And
the point slope form y minus y naught equals m times x minus x naught, where m again is
the slope and x naught y naught is a point on the line. This video is about rational
functions and their graphs. Recall that a rational function is a function that can be
written as a ratio or quotient of two polynomials. Here's an example. The simpler function, f
of x equals one over x is also considered a rational function, you can think of one
and x as very simple polynomials. The graph of this rational function is shown here. This
graph looks different from the graph of a polynomial. For one thing, its end behavior
is different. The end behavior of a function is the way the graph looks, when x goes through
really large positive, or really large negative numbers, we've seen that the end behavior
of a polynomial always looks like one of these cases. That is why marches off to infinity
or maybe negative infinity, as x gets really big or really negative. But this rational
function has a different type of end behavior. Notice, as x gets really big, the y values
are leveling off at about a y value of three. And similarly, as x values get really negative,
our graph is leveling off near the line y equals three, I'll draw that line, y equals
three on my graph, that line is called a horizontal asymptote. A horizontal asymptote is a horizontal
line that our graph gets closer and closer to as x goes to infinity, or as X goes to
negative infinity or both. There's something else that's different about this graph from
a polynomial graph, look at what happens as x gets close to negative five. As we approach
negative five with x values on the right, our Y values are going down towards negative
infinity. And as we approach the x value of negative five from the left, our Y values
are going up towards positive infinity. We say that this graph has a vertical asymptote
at x equals negative five. vertical asymptote is a vertical line that the graph gets closer
and closer to. Finally, there's something really weird going on at x equals two, there's
a little open circle there, like the value at x equals two is dug out. That's called
a hole. A hole is a place along the curve of the graph where the function doesn't exist.
Now that we've identified some of the features of our rational functions graph, I want to
look back at the equation and see how we could have predicted those features just by looking
at the equation. To find horizontal asymptotes. We need to look at what our function is doing
when x goes through really big positive or really big negative numbers. Looking at our
equation for our function, numerator is going to be dominated by the 3x squared term when
x is really big, right, because three times x squared is going to be absolutely enormous
compared to this negative 12. If x is a big positive or negative number in the denominator,
the denominator will be dominated by the x squared term. Again, if x is a really big
positive or negative number, like a million, a million squared will be much, much bigger
than three times a million or negative 10. For that reason, to find the end behavior,
or the horizontal asymptote, for our function, we just need to look at the terms on the numerator
and the term on the denominator that have the highest exponent, those are the ones that
dominate the expression in size. So as x gets really big, our functions y values are going
to be approximately 3x squared over x squared, which is three. That's why we have a horizontal
asymptote at y equals three. Now our vertical asymptotes, those
tend to occur where our denominator of our function is zero. That's because the function
doesn't exist when our denominator is zero. And when we get close to that place where
our denominator is zero, we're going to be dividing by tiny, tiny numbers, which will
make our Y values really big in magnitude. So to check where our denominators zero, let's
factor our function. In fact, I'm going to go ahead and factor the numerator and the
denominator. So the numerator factors, let's see, pull out the three, I get x squared minus
four, factor in the denominator, that factors into X plus five times x minus two, I can
factor a little the numerator a little further, that's three times x minus two times x plus
two over x plus 5x minus two. Now, when x is equal to negative five, my denominator
will be zero, but my numerator will not be zero. That's what gives me the vertical asymptote
at x equals negative five. Notice that when x equals two, the denominators zero, but the
numerator is also zero. In fact, if I cancelled the x minus two factor from the numerator
and denominator, I get a simplified form for my function that agrees with my original function,
as long as x is not equal to two. That's because when x equals two, the simplified function
exists, but the original function does not it's zero over zero, it's undefined. But for
every other x value, including x values near x equals two, our original function is just
the same as this function. And that's why our function only has a vertical asymptote
at x equals negative five, not one at x equals two, because the x minus two factor is no
longer in the function after simplifying, it does have a hole at x equals two, because
the original function is not defined there, even though the simplified version is if we
want to find the y value of our hole, we can just plug in x equals two into our simplified
version of our function, that gives a y value of three times two plus two over two plus
seven, or 12 ninths, which simplifies to four thirds. So our whole is that to four thirds.
Now that we've been through one example in detail, let's summarize our findings. We find
the vertical asymptotes and the holes by looking where the denominator is zero. The holes happen
where the denominator and numerator are both zero and those factors cancel out. The vertical
asymptotes are all other x values where the denominator is zero, we find the horizontal
asymptotes by considering the highest power term on the numerator and the denominator,
I'll explain this process in more detail in three examples. In the first example, if we
circle the highest power terms, that simplifies to 5x over 3x squared, which is five over
3x. As x gets really big, the denominator is going to be huge. So I'm going to be dividing
five by a huge, huge number, that's going to be going very close to zero, and therefore
we have a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero. In the second example, the highest power
terms, 2x cubed over 3x cubed simplifies to two thirds. So as x gets really big, we're
going to be heading towards two thirds and we have a horizontal asymptote at y equals
two thirds. In the third example, the highest power terms x squared over 2x simplifies to
x over two. As x gets really big, x over two is getting really big. And therefore, we don't
have a horizontal asymptote at all. This is going to infinity, when x gets through goes
through big positive numbers, and is going to negative infinity when x goes through a
big negative numbers. So in this case, the end behavior is kind of like that of a polynomial,
and there's no horizontal asymptote. In general, when the degree of the numerator
is smaller than the degree of the denominator, we're in this first case where the denominator
gets really big compared to the numerator and we go to zero. In the second case, where
the degree of the numerator and the degree of the denominator equal, things cancel out,
and so we get a horizontal asymptote at the y value, that's equal to the ratio of the
leading coefficients. Finally, in the third case, when the degree of the numerator is
bigger than the degree of the denominator, then the numerator is getting really big compared
to the denominator, so we end up with no horizontal asymptote. Finally, let's apply all these
observations to one more example. Please pause the video and take a moment to find the vertical
asymptotes, horizontal asymptotes and holes for this rational function. To find the vertical
asymptotes and holes, we need to look at where the denominator is zero. In fact, it's going
to be handy to factor both the numerator and the denominator. Since there if there are
any common factors, we might have a hole instead of a vertical asymptote. The numerator is
pretty easy to factor. Let's see, that's 3x times x plus one for the denominator, first
factor out an x. And then I'll factor some more using a guess and check method. I know
that I'll need a 2x and an X to multiply together to the to x squared, and I'll need a three
and a minus one or also minus three and a one. Let's see if that works. If I multiply
out 2x minus one times x plus three, that does give me back my 2x squared plus 5x minus
three, so that checks out. Now, I noticed that I have a common factor of x in both the
numerator and the denominator. So that's telling me I'm going to have a hole at x equals zero.
In fact, I could rewrite my rational function by cancelling out that common factor, and
that's equivalent, as long as x is not equal to zero. So the y value of my whole is what I get when I plug zero into my simplified
version, that would be three times zero plus one over two times zero minus one times zero
plus three, which is three over negative three or minus one. So my whole is at zero minus
one. Now all the remaining places in my denominator that make my denominator zero will get me
vertical asymptotes. So I'll have a vertical asymptote, when 2x minus one times x plus
three equals zero, that is, when 2x minus one is zero, or x plus three is zero. In other
words, when x is one half, or x equals negative three. Finally, to find my horizontal asymptotes,
I just need to consider the highest power term in the numerator and the denominator.
That simplifies to three over 2x, which is bottom heavy, right? When x gets really big,
this expression is going to zero. And that means that we have a horizontal asymptote
at y equals zero. So we found the major features of our graph, the whole, the vertical asymptotes
and the horizontal asymptotes. Together, this would give us a framework for what the graph
of our function looks like. horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, vertical asymptotes at x
equals one half, and x equals minus three at a hole at the point zero minus one. plotting
a few more points, or using a graphing calculator of graphing program, we can see that our actual
function will look something like this. Notice that the x intercept when x is negative one
corresponds to where the numerator of our rational function or reduced rational function
is equal to zero. That's because a zero on the numerator that doesn't make the denominator
zero makes the whole function zero. And an X intercept is where the y value of the whole
function is zero. In this video, we learned how to find horizontal asymptotes of rational
functions. By looking at the highest power terms, we learned to find the vertical asymptotes
and holes. By looking at the factored version of the functions, the holes correspond to
the x values that make the numerator and denominator zero, his corresponding factors cancel. The
vertical asymptotes correspond to the x values that make the denominator zero, even after
factoring any any common any common factors in the numerator denominator. This video focuses
on the behavior of functions and graphs, as x goes through arbitrarily large positive
and negative values. You may have touched on these ideas before in the past when you
studied horizontal asymptotes. But in this video, we'll talk about the same ideas in
the language of limits. In this first example, what happens to the function f of x drawn
below as x go through larger and larger positive numbers? Well, the arrow here on the end is
supposed to mean the trend continues. So as x gets bigger and bigger, the values of y,
that is f of x, get closer and closer to one, we can write this in the language of limits
by saying the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x is equal to one. Now what happens
to this function as x goes through larger and larger negative numbers, by larger and
larger negative numbers, I mean numbers that are negative but are larger and larger in
magnitude. So for example, negative five, negative 10, negative 100, and negative a
million and so on. Well, assuming this trend continues, it looks like f of x, even though
it's oscillating, it's settling down at a value of two. So we say that the limit as
x goes to negative infinity, of f of x equals to limits in which x goes to infinity, or
negative infinity are called limits at infinity. The phrase limits at infinity should be contrasted
with the phrase infinite limits. An infinite limit means that the y values, or the F of
X values go to infinity, or negative infinity. limits and infinity correspond to horizontal
asymptotes, as drawn above, while infinite limits correspond to vertical asymptotes.
The only exception to this when we don't have a horizontal or vertical asymptote is when
x and f of x are both going infinite at the same time, we'll see an example of this on
the next page. Let's figure out the limits of infinity for these two functions, g of
x and h of x. The function g of x is actually the function e to the minus x, and it has
a horizontal asymptote, heading right here at y equals zero. So the limit as x goes to
infinity of g of x equals zero. But as we head to the left, and x goes through larger
and larger negative values, our Y values don't settle down to a particular finite value,
they get arbitrarily large. And so we say that the limit as x goes to minus infinity
of g of x is equal to infinity. Now let's look at the graph of y equals h of x. Please
pause the video for a moment and try to figure out the limits of infinity for this function.
The limit as x goes to infinity of h of x is negative infinity. Because as x goes to
infinity, the y values get below or more negative than any finite number. Now as X goes to negative
infinity, the y values oscillate, and never settle down at a particular number. So we
say that the limit as x goes to minus infinity of h of x does not exist. Finally, let's look
at some limits of infinity of functions without looking at their graphs first, to find the
limit as x goes to infinity of one over x. Let's think about what happens to one over
x. As x gets bigger and bigger through positive numbers. As x gets bigger and bigger, one
over x gets smaller and smaller. So the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x equals
zero. To find the limit of one over x as x goes to negative infinity, let's look at what
happens as X goes to negative numbers that are larger and larger in magnitude. Now one
of our x goes through numbers that are negative, but they're still getting smaller and smaller.
magnitude. So the limit as x goes to negative infinity of one over x is also zero. We can
use similar reasoning to find the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x cubed. As
x goes to infinity, x cubed also goes to infinity. So one of our x cubed has to go to zero. To
find the limit as x goes to infinity of one over the square root of x, notice that as
x goes to infinity, the square root of x still goes to infinity. So one over the square root
of x also goes to zero. In other words, both of these limits are equal to zero. Both of
these examples are actually closely related, because both have the form of the limit as
x goes to infinity of one over x to the R, where R is a number greater than zero. In
the second example, the square root of x is really x to the R, where R is one half. In
fact, the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x to the R is always equal to zero. Whenever
R is bigger than zero, we can even say the same thing about the limit as x goes to negative
infinity of one over x to the R. As long as we avoid exponents, like one half that don't
make sense for negative numbers. But for other values of r, as x goes to negative infinity,
x to the R is getting bigger and bigger and magnitude. And so one over x to the R is getting
smaller and smaller and magnitude and heading towards zero. Notice that this is no longer
true. if r is less than zero, for example, something like r equals negative two, because
one over x to the minus two is really x squared. And the limit as x goes to infinity of x squared
is going to be infinity, not zero. In this video, we looked at examples of limits
as x goes to infinity, and x goes to minus infinity. And we saw that those limits could
be zero. Any other number, infinity, negative infinity, or not exist. This video gives some
algebraic techniques for computing the limits at infinity of rational functions. Let's find
the limit as x goes to infinity of this rational function. The numerator and the denominator
of this rational function are each getting arbitrarily large as x goes to infinity. One
way to see this is by estimating the graphs, the graph of the numerator looks like a parabola
pointing upwards. And the graph of the denominator looks like some kind of cubic. So something
like this, for both of these graphs, as x goes to infinity, y also goes to infinity.
So this is an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. And just like the zero have over zero
indeterminate forms we saw earlier, and infinity over infinity and determinant form could turn
out to be absolutely anything. So we're going to use algebra to rewrite this expression
in a different form that makes it easier to evaluate. Specifically, we're going to factor
out the highest power of x that we can find from the numerator, and then from the denominator.
In the numerator, I'm going to factor out the highest power I see in the numerator,
which is x squared. When I factor x squared out of 5x squared, I get five, when I factor
x squared out of negative 4x, that's like dividing negative 4x by x squared, so I get
negative four divided by x. You can check this works by distributing the x squared and
making sure we get back to the original expression. Now the highest power of x SC, and the denominator
is x cubed. So I'll factor out an x cubed for each from each of those terms, I get a
two minus 11 over x plus 12 over x squared. Because factoring out an x cubed is the same
as dividing each term by x cubed and then writing the x cubed on the side. Now, we can
rewrite again by canceling an x squared from the top and the bottom to get the limit of
one over x times five minus four over x over two minus 11 over x plus 12 over x squared.
Now as x goes to infinity, four over x goes to zero, because I'm dividing for by larger
and larger numbers. Similarly 11 over x goes to zero, and 12 over x squared goes to zero.
So I end up with one over x, which is itself going to zero times something that's going
to five halves. So my limit is going to be zero times five halves, which is just zero.
I've actually been applying limit laws to do these last steps, which is fine, because
my component limits exist as finite numbers. Something that wasn't true from my original
expression when I had infinity over infinity. In this example, we're asked to find the limit
as x goes to negative infinity of a different rational expression. I encourage you to stop
the video and try it for yourself first. In this example, the highest power of x in the
numerator is x cubed, and the highest power in the denominator is also x cubed. Factoring
out the x cubed from the numerator, we get x cubed times three plus six over x plus 10
over x squared, plus two over x cubed. And factoring out the x cubed from the denominator,
we get x cubed times two, plus one over X plus five over x cubed. Now the x cubes cancel,
and all these parts go to zero. So when the dust clears here, our limit is just three
halves. In this next example, the highest power in the numerator is x to the fourth,
and the highest power in the denominator is x squared. So we factor out the x to the fourth
from the numerator and the x squared from the denominator and cancel as much as we can.
A lot of these pieces are going to zero. So our limit is the same as the limit of x
squared times one over negative five. As x goes to negative infinity, x squared is positive
and goes towards positive infinity. multiplying by negative fifth turns it negative, but doesn't
change the fact that the magnitudes are getting arbitrarily large. Therefore, our final limit
is negative infinity. Now let's look at the same three examples again, more informally,
using a heuristic to get the same conclusions. In the first example, the term 5x squared
dominates the numerator, because x squared is much larger than x when x is large. In
the denominator, the highest power of x to x cubed dominates, because x cubed is much
larger than x squared, or x when x is large. If we ignore all the other terms in the numerator
and denominator, and just focus on the important terms, which have the highest powers, then
we can rewrite our limit as the limit of 5x squared over 2x cubed, which is the same as
the limit as x goes to infinity of five over 2x, just by canceling Xs, which is zero as
x goes to infinity. Similarly, if we just focus on the highest power terms in the numerator
and denominator in the second example, we get the limit of 3x cubed over 2x cubed, which
simplifies to the limit of three halves, which is just three halves. In the third example,
the highest power terms are x to the fourth and negative 5x squared. And we rewrite the
limit using only these highest power terms and simplify, and we get the limit as x goes
to negative infinity of x squared over negative five, which is negative infinity as before,
for rational functions, in general, looking at the highest power terms, lets you reliably
predict the limits that infinity and negative infinity when the degree of the numerator
is less than the degree of the denominator, then the limit as x goes to infinity, or negative
infinity, is zero. As an example, one above, when the degree of the numerator is equal
to the degree of the denominator, then the limit is just the quotient of the highest
power terms, which is how we got three halves as the limit in the second example. And finally,
if the degree of the numerator is greater than the degree of the denominator, then the
limit is going to be plus or minus infinity. Like it was in the third example. These shortcut
rules are really handy. But it's important to also understand the technique of factoring
out highest power terms. Since this technique can be used more generally. This video gave
two methods for computing limits and infinity of rational functions. First, there's the
formal method of factoring out highest power terms and simplifying. Second, there's the
informal method of looking at the degree of the numerator and the degree of the denominator,
and focusing on the highest power terms. In the past, you may have heard an informal definition
of continuity. Something like a function is continuous, if you can draw it without ever
picking up your pencil. In this video, we'll develop a more precise definition of continuity
based on limits. It can be helpful to look at some examples of functions that are discontinuous,
that is functions that fail to be continuous. In order to better understand what it means
to be continuous. Please pause this video and try to draw graphs of at least two different
functions that fail to be continuous in different ways. One common kind of discontinuity is
called a jump discontinuity. A function has a jump discontinuity, if its graph separates
the two pieces with a jump in between them. This particular function can be described
as a piecewise defined function with two linear equations, f of x equals to x when x is less
than or equal to one, and f of x equals negative x plus two, when x is greater than one. Another
common kind of discontinuity is called a removable discontinuity. You may have encountered these before, when
you learned about rational functions with holes in them, for example, the function f
of x equals x minus three squared times x minus four divided by x minus four, which
has a hole when x equals four, and otherwise looks like the graph of x minus three squared.
This kind of discontinuity is called removable, because you could get rid of it by plugging
the hole just by defining F to have an appropriate value when x equals four. So in this case,
you'd want f of x to be the same when x is not equal to four, but you'd want it to have
the value of one when x equals four. And that would amount to plugging the hole and making
it continuous. In this original example, our function had a removable discontinuity because
it wasn't defined when x equals four. But a function could also have a removable discontinuity,
because it's defined in the wrong place at x equals four, for example, too high or too
low, to fit the trend of f. a discontinuity can also occur at a vertical asymptote, where
it's called an infinite discontinuity. For example, the rational function g of x is one
over x minus two has an infinite discontinuity at x equals two. Occasionally, you may encounter
a discontinuity is that don't look like any of these. For example, the graph of the function
y equals cosine of one over X has a wild discontinuity at x equals zero, because of the wild oscillating
behavior there. So for a function to be continuous at x equals a, we need it to avoid all of
these problems. To avoid a jump discontinuity, we can insist that the functions limit has
to exist at x equals a way to avoid a hole or removable discontinuity, we can insist
that F has to be defined at x equals A to avoid the other kind of removable discontinuity
in which f of a is defined, but it's in the wrong place. We can insist that the limit
of f of x as x goes to a has to equal f of a. Sometimes the definition of continuity
is written with just the third condition, and the first two conditions are implied.
Notice that these three conditions not only exclude jump this continuity and removal this
continuity is they also exclude infinite discontinuities and wild discontinuities. For example, in
our third example, the function can't be continuous at x equals two, because it fails to have
a limit at x equals two and it fails to have a value at x equals two. In our wild, this
continuity example, the limit also fails to exist at x equals zero, so the function can't
be continuous there. So what are the places where this function f is not in us and why,
please take a moment to think about it for yourself. The functions not continuous at
negative three, because the function is simply not defined there, the functions not continuous
at x equals one, because of that jump discontinuity. In the language of limits, we say that the
limit of f of x does not exist, when x equals two, the limit of the function exists and
equals three, but the value of the function is down here at negative one. So the function
is not continuous, because the limit doesn't equal the value at x equals three, the function
is not continuous, because once again, the limit doesn't exist. Notice that x equals
negative two. Even though the function turns a corner, the function still continuous. Because
the limit exists and equals two, and the value of the function is also two. The function
drawn here is not continuous at x equals negative two, because the limit doesn't exist at x
equals negative two, the limit from the left is one, while the limit from the right is
zero. But it is true that the value of the function at x equals negative two is equal
to the limit of the function from the left side. That is, f of negative two is equal
to the limit as x goes to negative two from the left of f of x. Notice that we can't say the same thing about
the right limit. The limit from the right is zero, while the value of the function is
one, and those are equal. In this situation, we say that f is continuous from the left,
but not from the right. By the same reasoning at x equals one, the function is not continuous,
but it is continuous from the right, because the limit from the right is equal to the value
of the function. Notice that f is not continuous from the left here, because the limit from
the left is about one and a half, while the value of the function is one. In general,
we say that a function f is continuous from the left at x equals j. If the limit as x
goes to a from the left of f of x is equal to f of a, and a function is continuous from
the right at x equals a. If the limit as x goes to a from the right of f of x equals
f of a, in practical terms of function is continuous from the left if the endpoint is
included on the left piece, and a function is continuous from the right, if the endpoint
is included on the right piece. This video gave a precise definition of continuity at
a point in terms of limits. Namely, a function is continuous at the point x equals a. If
the limit as x goes to a of the function is equal to the functions value at A. In a previous video, we gave a definition
for continuity at a point. In this video, we'll discuss continuity on an interval and
continuous functions. We say that a function f of x is continuous on the open interval
BC, if f of x is continuous at every point in that interval. For x to be continuous on
a closed interval BC, we require it to be continuous on every point in the interior
of BC, but we just require it to be continuous from the right at B. And from the left at
sea. We can also talk about f being continuous on half open intervals. For example, on half
open interval, BC, which is open at B and closed at sea, or the other way around, or
the happy to open it all from B to infinity and so on. In all of these cases, we require
F to be continuous on the interior of the interval, and left or right continuous on
the closed endpoints of the interval as appropriate. So on what intervals is this function geovax
continuous? Well, it's continuous. On this part, the arrows indicate it keeps on going.
So I'd say it's continuous from negative infinity to negative one, not including the endpoint
negative one. It's also continuous here, and we can include the endpoint this time. So
this is from negative one to one and Then again, on this last section, we can't include
one. It's not continuous there. It's not even defined there. So what kinds of functions
are continuous? What kinds of functions are continuous everywhere? And by everywhere,
I mean, on the entire real line negative infinity infinity? Well, polynomials are a great example.
Also, sine x and cosine x, the absolute value of x is another common example. There are
certainly many other functions that are continuous on the whole real line. I'll let you see if
you can come up with some more examples. Now, if we ask the second question, what kinds
of functions are continuous on their domains, we get a lot more answers, not only polynomials,
but also all rational functions, things like f of x equals 5x minus two over x minus three
squared times x plus four is a good example of a rational function, even though it's not
continuous everywhere. Because it's not continuous when x equals three or negative four, it is
continuous on its whole domain, because three and four are not in the domain of this rational
function. In addition, all trig functions, inverse trig functions, log and either the
x functions. And pretty much all the functions we normally encounter are continuous on their
domains, although their domains are not necessarily the whole real line. For example, for natural
log of x, the domain is just zero, infinity, and that's where the function is continuous.
In addition, the sums, differences, products and quotients of continuous functions are
continuous on their domains, so for example, y equals sine of x plus the natural log of
x is continuous where it's defined, the compositions of continuous functions are continuous on
their domains. So for example, the function y equals ln of sine of x is continuous, where
defined turns out to be a bunch of disjoint intervals where sine is positive. Since continuity
is defined in terms of limits, it's sometimes possible to use our knowledge of which functions
are continuous to calculate limits. For example, if we want to find the limit as x goes to
zero of cosine of x, because cosine is continuous, we can evaluate this limit just by plugging
in zero for x. And cosine of zero is one. We're using the definition of continuity here
to say that the limit of the function is equal to the value of the function. The second example
is a little trickier, because the function inside is not continuous at x equals two.
In fact, it's not defined at x equals two. But as X approaches 2x squared minus four
over 2x minus four times pi, can be rewritten as x plus two times x minus two over two times
x minus two times pi, which is the same thing as x plus two over two pi. For x not equal
to two. So as X approaches two, this expression here, approaches two plus two over two times
pi, which is just two pi. In other words, the limit as x goes to two of x squared minus
four over 2x minus four pi is just two pi. And therefore, the limit as x goes to two
of cosine of this expression is just cosine of two pi, which is again equal to one. We're
using here the fact that cosine is continuous, and a property of continuous functions, which
says that the limit as x goes to a of f of g of x is equal to f of the limit as x goes
to a of g of x. If f is a continuous function. In other words, for continuous functions,
you can pass the limit inside the function. That's all for continuity on intervals and
continuous functions. The intermediate value theorem says that if f is a continuous function,
on the closed interval a b and if n is any number, in between F of A and F of Bay, n
f has to achieve that value and somewhere. In other words, if n is a number between F
of A and F of b, then there has to be a number c in the interval a, b, such that f of c equals
n. In our example, there are three such possible values for C, it could be right here, since
f of that number equals n, or it could be here, or here, I'll just mark the middle one.
The intermediate value theorem can only be applied to continuous functions. If the function
is not continuous, then it might jump over and, and never achieve that value. When application
of the intermediate value theorem is to prove the existence of roots or zeros of equations,
we call that a real root of p of x is a real number c, such that P of C is zero, we're going to want
to apply the intermediate value theorem with n equal to zero. Our polynomial is defined
on the whole real line, not just an interval. But the trick here is to pick an interval
a b, so that P of A is negative, and P of B is positive, or vice versa. So that the
intermediate value theorem will tell us that P has to pass through zero in between. I'm
just going to use trial and error here and calculate a few values of p. So P of zero
is easy to calculate, P of zero is just seven. P of one is going to be five minus three minus
12 plus seven, which equals negative three. So in this very lucky example, the first two
numbers that we pick will work for our A and B, so we can just let A be equal 01. Because
P of zero is a positive number, and P of one is a negative number. So actually, the graph
should look a little different. The graph looks more like this. But in any case, by
the intermediate value theorem, there has to be a number c, in between, in this case,
zero and one, where our polynomial p achieves this intermediate value of zero. And that
number See, we don't know what it is, but we know it somewhere in the interval zero
to one, that value c gives us a real root for our polynomial. There may be other real
roots, but we've proved there exists at least one. The intermediate value theorem has lots
of other applications besides finding roots. For example, suppose you have a wall that
runs in a circle around the castle, and the height of the wall varies continuously as
a function of the angle. Surprisingly, the intermediate value theorem can be used to
show there must be somewhere two diametrically opposite places on the wall with exactly the
same height. So if you can figure out a way to show this in this video, we stated the
intermediate value theorem, which holds for continuous functions, and talked about a couple
of applications. This video introduces the trig functions, sine, cosine, tangent, secant,
cosecant, and cotangent. For right triangles. For a right triangle with sides of length
A, B and C angle theta as drawn, we define sine of theta as the length of the opposite
side over the hypothesis. The side that's opposite to our angle theta has measure a
and I have partners is this side here with measure C. So that would be a oversee for
this triangle. Cosine of theta is defined as the length of the adjacent side over the
length of high partners. This side here is the side adjacent to theta. Of course, the
high partners is also adjacent to theta, but it's special as the high partners so we don't
think of it as the adjacent side. So that would be B oversea. tangent of theta is the
opposite side length over the adjacent side length. So that would be a over b. The pneumonic
to remember this is so A toa. That's sine is opposite over hypotenuse. Cosine is adjacent
over hypotenuse. And tangent is opposite over adjacent. In fact, there's a relationship
between tangent and sine and cosine. Namely, tangent of theta is equal to sine of theta
over cosine of theta. If you want to see why that's, that's because sine of theta over
cosine of theta is given by sine, which is opposite over hypotenuse, divided by cosine,
which is adjacent over hypotenuse. If we compute these fractions by flipping and multiplying, the high partners, length cancels, and we
just get opposite over adjacent, which is by definition, tangent of theta. There are
three more trig functions that are defined in terms of sine, cosine and tangent. First
of all, their sequence of theta, by definition, that's one over cosine of theta. So it's going
to be one over the adjacent over hypotenuse, which is the high partners over the adjacent,
which in this triangle is C over B. cosecant of theta is defined as one over sine theta.
So that's one over the opposite over the hypotenuse, which is the high partners over the opposite.
And for this triangle, that's going to be C over a. Finally, cotangent of theta is defined
as one over tan theta, that's going to be one over opposite over adjacent, flip and
multiply, I get adjacent over opposite birth, which in this case is b over a. So notice
that the values for cotangent cosecant and secant are the reciprocals of the values for
tangent, sine and cosine, respectively. Let's use these definitions to find the exact values
of all six trig functions for the angle theta in this triangle. I'll start with sine of
theta. That's the opposite of our hypothesis. Well, for this angle theta, the opposite side
is down here, and as measured to the high partners has measured five. So sine theta
is two over five. Cosine theta is adjacent over hypotenuse, but I don't know the value
of this side length. But fortunately, I can find it using the Fagor in theorem says I
have a right triangle here, I know that a squared, I'll call this side length A plus
B squared, where b is this other leg of the triangle is equal to c squared, where c is
the hypothesis. So here I have a squared plus two squared equals five squared, which means
that a squared plus four equals 25. A squared is 21. So A is plus or minus the square root
of 21. But since I'm talking about the length of a side of a triangle, I can just use the
positive answer. Returning to my computation of cosine theta, I can write it as adjacent,
which is the square root of 21. Over hypotony News, which is five, tangent theta is the
opposite over the adjacent, so that's going to be two over the square root of 21. To compute
secant of theta, that's one over cosine theta, so that's going to be one over square root
of 21 over five, which is five over the square root of 21. The reciprocal of my cosine value.
cosecant theta is one over sine theta, that's going to be the reciprocal of my sine, so
five halves, and cotangent theta is one over a tan theta, so it's going to be the reciprocal
of my 10 value square root of 21 over two. Finally, we'll do an application. So if we
have a kite that's flying at an angle of elevation as the angle from the horizontal bar of 75
degrees with a kite length string of 100 meters, we want to find out how high it is. I'll call
the height Why? Well, we want to relate the known quantities this angle and this hypothesis
to The unknown quantity, the unknown quantity is the opposite side of our triangle. So if
we use sine of theta equals opposite of our hypothesis, then we can relate these known
amounts sine of 75 degrees to our unknown amount y, which is the opposite and are known
amount of 100 meters. solving for y, this gives that y is 100 meters times sine of 75
degrees, we can use a calculator to compute sine of 75 degrees, be sure you use degree
mode and not radian mode, when you type in the 75. When I do the computation, I get a
final answer of 96.59 meters up to two decimal places. Notice that we're ignoring the height
of the person in this problem. To remember the definitions of the trig functions,
you can use the pneumonic, so tau, and the fact that secant is the reciprocal of cosine
cosecant the reciprocal of sine and cotangent the reciprocal of tangent. In this video,
I'll use geometry to compute the sine and cosine of a 30 degree angle, a 45 degree angle
and a 60 degree angle. One way to compute the sine of a 45 degree angle is to use a
right triangle with a 45 degree angle. This particular right triangle has I have partners
of length one. Since all the angles of the triangle have to add up to 180 degrees, and
we already have 90 degrees and 45 degrees, the remaining angle must also be 45 degrees.
So we have an isosceles triangle with two sides the same length, I'll call that side
length a. If we want sine of 45 degrees, let's use this 45 degree angle here, then sine is
opposite over hypotenuse. So if I can figure out how long this side length is, I'll be
able to compute sine of 45 degrees. Now the Pythagorean theorem says this side length
squared plus that side land squared equals I have hotness squared. So we have that a
squared plus a squared equals one squared. All right, that is two A squared equals one.
So a squared is one half, and a is plus or minus the square root of one half. Since we're
talking about the length of sides of triangles, I can just use the positive square root it's
customary to rewrite this as the square root of one over the square root of two, which
is one over the square root of two, and then rationalize the denominator by multiplying
the top and the bottom by the square root of two. That gives me a square root of two
in the numerator, and the square root of two squared in the denominator, which is the square
root of two over two. So the side lengths are the square root of two over two. Now I
can figure out the sine of 45 degrees, by computing the opposite over the hypotenuse.
That's, I'm looking at this angle. So opposite is square root of two over two hypothesis
one. So the sine of 45 degrees is the square root of two over two. Cosine of 45 degrees
is adjacent over hypotenuse. That's this side length over this hypothesis. So that's the
square root of two over two over one again, what would happen if instead of using this
triangle with hypotony is one, we use this triangle, also a 4545 90 triangle with hypotony
is five, not quite drawn to scale. Please pause the video for a moment and repeat the
computation with this triangle. This time, I'll call the side length B. Pythagoras theorem
tells me b squared plus b squared equals five squared. So two, b squared equals 25. And
b squared equals 25 over two, B is going to be the plus or minus the square root of 25
over two again, I can just use the positive version. And so B is the square root of 25
over the square root of two, which is five over the square root of two, rationalizing
the denominator, I get five root two over two. Now, sine of my 45 degree angle is opposite
overhype hotness, which is five square root of two over two divided by
five. That simplifies to the square root of two over two as before, and a similar computation
shows that cosine of 45 degrees is also square root of two over two as before. This makes
sense because sine and cosine are based on ratios of sides. And since these two triangles
are similar triangles, they'll have the same ratios of sides. To find the sine and cosine
of 30 degrees, let's use this 30 6090 right triangle with hypotony is one. If we double
the triangle, we get an angle of 30 here, so a total angle of 60 degrees here, and this
angle is also 60 degrees. So we have a 60 6060 triangle, that's an equilateral triangle,
all side lengths are the same. Since this side length has length one, this side length
is also one. This entire side length is one, which means this short side of our original
triangle has length one half. Going back to my original triangle, let's use the Pythagorean
Theorem to find the length of its longer side x. But agrin theorem says x squared plus one
half squared equals one squared. So x squared plus a fourth equals 1x squared is three fourths.
And so x is plus or minus the square root of three fourths is the positive version,
and get the square root of three over the square root of four, which is the square root
of three over two. Now using our original triangle, again, let's compute the sine of
this 30 degree angle here. We know that sine of 30 degrees is opposite of our hypothesis,
the opposite of this angle is one half and the hypothesis is one. So we get a sine of
one half over one, which is one half cosine of 30 degrees is adjacent over hypothesis.
So that's the square root of three over two divided by one. To find sine of 60 degrees
and cosine of 60 degrees, we can actually use this same green triangle and just focus
on this upper corner angle of 60 degrees instead. So sine of 60 degrees. Opposite overhype hotness,
but this time the opposite to this angle is the square root of three over two. Cosine
of 60 degrees adjacent over hypotenuse gives us one half. I'll summarize the results in
this table below. Notice that a 30 degree angle corresponds to pi over six radians since
30 degrees times pi over 180 is pi over six. Similarly, 45 degrees corresponds to pi over
four radians and 60 degrees corresponds to pi over three radians. I recommend that you
memorize the three numbers one half, root two over two, and root three over two. And
the fact that one half and root three over two go together. And root two over two goes
with itself. From that information, it's not hard to reconstruct the triangles, you know
that a 4545 90 triangle is my sauciest triangle. So it must have the side lengths were the
same number goes with itself. And a 30 6090 triangle has one side length smaller than
the other. So the smaller side must be one half and the larger side must be root three
over two since root three is bigger than one and so root three over two is bigger than
one half. Doing a visual check, you can easily fill in the angles, the smaller angle must
be the 30 degree angle, and the larger one must be the 60 degree one. In this video,
we computed the sine and cosine of three special angles 30 degrees, 45 degrees, and 60 degrees.
This video defined sine and cosine in terms of points on the unit circle. a unit circle
is a circle with radius one. Up to now we defined sine and cosine and tangent
in terms of right triangles. For example, to find sine of 14 degrees in theory, you
could draw a right triangle with an angle of 14 degrees and then calculate the sign
as the length of the opposite side over the length of pi partners. But if we use this
method to try to compute sine of 120 degrees, things go horribly wrong. When we draw this
120 degree angle, and this right angle, there's no way to complete this picture to get a right
triangle. So instead, we're going to use a unit circle, that is a circle of radius one.
The figure below illustrates how right triangles and a unit circle are related. If you draw
right triangles, with larger of hypotenuse one with larger and larger angles, then the
top vertex sweeps out part of a unit circle. Let's look at this relationship in more detail.
In this figure, I've drawn a right triangle inside a unit circle, the high partners of
the triangle is the radius of the circle, which is one, one vertex of the right triangle
is at the origin, another vertex of the right triangle is at the edge of the circle, I'm
going to call the coordinates of that vertex A, B. Now the base of this right triangle
has length a, the x coordinate, and the height of the right triangle is B, the y coordinate.
If I use the right triangle definition of sine and cosine of theta, this right here
is the angle theta, then cosine of theta is adjacent over hypotenuse, so that's a over
one, or a. Notice that a also represents the x coordinate of this point on the unit circle.
At angle theta from the x axis. I'll write that down. For sine of theta, if I use the
right triangle definition, that's opposite overhead partners, so B over one, which is
just B. But B also represents the y coordinate of this point in the on the unit circle at
angle theta. For tangent theta, if we use the right side triangle definition, its opposite
over adjacent. So that's B over A, I can think of that as the y coordinate of the point over
the x coordinate of the point. Now for angles theta, that can't be part of a right triangle,
because they're too big, they're bigger than 90 degrees, like now I'll call this angle
here theta, I can still use this idea of x and y coordinates to calculate the sine and
cosine of theta. So if I just mark this point, on the end of this line at angle theta, if
I mark that to have coordinates x and y, then cosine theta, I'm still going to define as
the x coordinate of this point, sine theta as the y coordinate, and tangent theta as
the ratio of the y coordinate over the x coordinate. When we use this unit circle definition, we
always draw theta starting from the positive x axis and going counterclockwise. Let's use
this unit circle definition to calculate sine, cosine and tangent of this angle fee. In our
figure, we have a unit circle. And these numbers are supposed to represent the x&y coordinates
of this point on the unit circle at the endpoint of this line segment, that lies at angle fee
for the positive x axis. Sign fee is equal to the y coordinate cosine fee is equal to
the x coordinate. And tangent of fee is given by the ratio of the two, which works out to
negative 0.3639 up to four decimal places. This video gives a method for calculating
sine cosine and tangent in terms of the unit circle. Starting from the positive x axis,
you draw the angle theta going counterclockwise. You look at the coordinates of the point on
the circle where that angle ends. And the cosine of that angle theta is the x coordinate,
sine of theta is the y coordinate, and tangent of theta is the ratio. This video gives three
properties of the trig function sine and cosine that can be deduced from the unit circle definition.
Recall that the unit circle definition of sine and cosine for angle theta is that cosine
theta is the x coordinate. And sine of theta is the y coordinate for the point on the unit
circle at angle theta. The first property is what I call the periodic property. This
says that the values of cosine and sine are periodic with period two pi. And what that
means is that if you take cosine of an angle plus two pi, you get the same thing as just
if you took cosine of the angle. So when we write this down, we're assuming that theta
is measured in radians. If we want to measure theta in degrees, the similar statement is
that cosine of theta plus 360 degrees is equal to cosine of theta, we can make the same statements
for sine, sine of an angle plus two pi is equal to sine of the original angle, here,
the angle being measured in radians. If we want to measure the angle in degrees, the
statement is that sine of theta plus 360 is equal to sine of theta, we can see why this
is true from the unit circle definition of sine and cosine. This is our angle theta,
then theta plus two pi, the plus two pi adds a full turn around the unit circle to our
angle, so we end up at the same place, theta and theta plus two pi are just two different
names for the same location on the unit circle. And since sine and cosine give you the y and
x coordinates of that point on the unit circle, they have to have the same value. Similarly,
if we consider an angle theta, and an angle theta minus two pi, the minus two pi means
we go the other direction around the unit circle clockwise, we still end up in the same
place. And therefore, cosine of theta minus two pi, the x coordinate of that position
is the same thing as cosine of theta, sine of theta minus two pi is the same thing as
sine of theta, the same statements hold if we add or subtract multiples of two pi. For
example, cosine of theta plus four pi is still the same thing as cosine of theta. This time,
we've just gone to turns around the unit circle and still gotten back to the same place. So
if we want to find cosine of five Pi, that's the same thing as cosine of pi plus four pi,
which is the same thing as cosine of pi. Thinking about the unit circle, pi is halfway around
the unit circle. So cosine of pi means the x coordinate of this point right here. Well,
that point has coordinates negative one, zero, so cosine of pi must be negative one. If I
want to take sine of negative 420 degrees, well, that's sine of negative 360 degrees,
minus 60 degrees, which is the same thing as sine of minus 60 degrees. Thinking about
the unit circle, minus 60 degrees, means I start at the positive x axis and go clockwise
by 60 degrees that lands me about right here. And so that's one of the special angles that
has an x coordinate of one half a y coordinate of negative root three over two. And therefore
sine of negative 60 is negative root three over two the y coordinate. The next property
I call the even odd property, it says that cosine is an even function, which means that
cosine of negative theta is the same thing as cosine of theta, while sine is an odd function,
which means that sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta. To see why
this is true, let's look at an angle theta. And the angle negative theta. A negative angle
means you go in the clockwise instead of counterclockwise direction from the positive x axis. The coordinates of this point by definition,
r cosine theta sine theta, whereas the coordinates of this point are cosine negative theta, sine
of negative theta. But by symmetry, these two points have the exact same x coordinate,
and therefore cosine of theta must equal cosine of negative theta, while their y coordinates
have the same magnitude, but opposite signs. This one's positive and this one's negative.
Have, therefore, sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta. Let's figure
out if tan of theta isn't even or odd function. Well, we know that tan of negative theta,
tangent by definition, is sine over cosine. Well, we know that sine of negative theta
is the negative of sine of theta, whereas cosine of negative theta is cosine of theta.
Therefore, we're getting negative sign theta over cosine theta, which is negative tan of
theta. Since tan of negative theta is the negative of tan of theta, tan theta is an
odd function. The last property on this video is the Pythagorean property, which says that
cosine of theta squared plus sine of theta squared is equal to one. A lot of times this
property is written with this shorthand notation, cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta
equals one. But this notation, cosine squared theta just means you take cosine of theta
and square it. This property is called the Pythagorean property, because it comes from
the Pythagorean Theorem. Let me draw a right triangle on the unit circle. I'll call this
angle theta. So the coordinates of this endpoint here are cosine theta sine theta. Since this
is supposed to be a unit circle, the hypotenuse of my right triangle has length one, the base
of my right triangle is just cosine theta, same thing as the x coordinate of this point.
And the height of my triangle is the y coordinate of the point sine theta. Now the Pythagorean
theorem says that this side length squared plus that so that squared equals one squared,
since one squared is the same thing as one, that gives me the Pythagorean property. But
tigrayan property is handy for computing values of cosine given values of sine and vice versa.
And this problem, we're told that sine of t is negative two sevenths. And T is an angle
that lies in quadrant three. When we say the angle lies in quadrant three, that means the
terminal side of the angle lies here in quadrant three. One way to find cosine of t is to use
the fact that cosine squared t plus sine squared t is equal to one. That is cosine of t squared
plus negative 2/7 squared is equal to one, I can write this as cosine of t squared plus
4/49 is equal to one and so cosine of t squared is equal to one minus 4/49, which is 4540
nights. taking the square root of both sides, that goes for the cosine t is plus or minus
the square root of 45 over 49, that's plus or minus the square root of 45 over seven.
Now since we're in the third quadrant, we know that cosine of t, which represents the
x coordinate of this point, must also be negative. Therefore, cosine of t is going to be negative
square to 45 over seven. It's also possible to solve this problem using the Pythagorean
theorem for right triangles directly. If we look at the fact that sine of t is negative
two sevenths and ignore the negative sign for now, we can think of this information
as telling us that we have a right triangle angle theta, whose opposite side is two, and
whose high partners is seven. We call this side here a them but Tiger in
theorem says us a squared plus two squared is seven squared. So a squared plus four is
49. So a squared is 45. And a is plus or minus the square root of 45. Since I'm worrying
about a triangle, I'm going to use the positive value. Now, cosine of t is going to be adjacent
over hypotenuse. So that's going to be the square root of 45 over seven. Now I go back
to thinking about positive and negative signs. And I noticed that since I'm in the third
quadrant, my co sign is be negative, so I just stick a negative sign in front. This
alternative solution, this is many of the same ideas as the previous solution, and ultimately
gets us the same answer. This video gives three properties of trig functions, the periodic
property, the even odd property, and the Pythagorean property. This video is about the graphs of
sine and cosine. I want to graph the functions y equals cosine t and y equals sine t, where
t is in radians, I'm gonna think of this being the t axis, and this being the y axis. One
way to do this is to plot points. So I'll fill in this chart, using my knowledge of
special angles on the unit circle. These points will be easier to graph, if I convert them
all to decimals. Now plot the points for cosine and connect the dots to get a graph of y equals
cosine t from t equals zero to t equals two pi. To continue the graph for t values less
than zero or bigger than two pi, I could plot more points. Or I could just use the fact
that the cosine values repeat. If I add or subtract two pi to the my angle T, I'll be
at the same place on the unit circle. So my cosine will be exactly the same. Therefore,
my values of cosine, which are represented by my y values on this graph, repeat themselves.
For example, when my T value is two pi plus pi over six about like here, it's cosine is
the same as the cosine of just pi over six. So I'll take this dot here and repeat it over
here. Similarly, the when t is like two pi plus pi over four, I get the same value of
cosine is when it's just pi over four. So this.is going to repeat. And I can continue
repeating all my dots. This one repeats over here at two pi plus, say pi over three. And
so my whole graph will repeat something like this. It also repeats on this side, something
like this. Since subtracting two pi from my t values will also give me the same value
of cosine. We can also plot points to get a graph for sine and extend it by repetition.
Going forward, I'll usually write the function sine and cosine as y equals cosine of x and
y equals sine of x. When I read it this way, notice that x now refers to an angle, while
y refers to a value of cosine, or sine. That's a different meaning of x and y, compared to
when we're talking about the unit circle, where x refers to the cosine value, and y
refers to the sine value. Now let's look at some properties of the graphs of sine and
cosine. The first thing you might notice is that the graph of cosine and the graph of
sine are super similar to each other. In fact, you can think of the graph of cosine as just
being the graph of sine shifted to the left by pi over two. So we can write cosine of
x as the sine function of x plus pi over two, since adding pi over two on the inside, move
the graph horizontally to the left by pi over two. Or we can think of the graph of sine
as being constructed from the graph of cosine by shifting the cosine graph right by pi over
two, that means we can write sine of x as equal to cosine of x minus pi over two, since
subtracting pi over two on the inside, shifts the cosine graph to the right by pi over two. Next, let's look at domain and range. The
domain of sine and cosine is all real numbers. All right, that is negative infinity to infinity,
but the range is just from negative one to one. That makes sense, because sine and cosine
come from the unit circle. The input values for the domain come from angles. And you can
use any numbers and angle positive or negative as big as you want, just by wrapping a lot
of times around the circle. The output values for the range, that is the actual values of
sine and cosine come from the coordinates on the unit circle. And those coordinates
can't be any bigger than one or any smaller than negative one. So that gives us a range.
As far as even an odd behavior, you can tell from the graph. Here's cosine, that it's symmetric
with respect to the y axis and so it must be even. Whereas the graph of sine is symmetric
with respect to the origin and must be odd. The absolute maximum value have these two
functions is one and the absolute minimum value is negative one. We can also use the
words midline amplitude and period to describe these two functions. The midline is the horizontal
line, halfway in between the maximum and minimum points. Here, the midline is y equals zero,
the amplitude is the vertical distance between a maximum point and the midline. You can also
think of the amplitude as the vertical distance between a minimum point and the midline, or
as half the vertical distance between a midpoint and a max point. For the cosine function and
the sine function, the amplitude is one. A periodic function is a function that repeats
at regular horizontal intervals. The horizontal length of the smallest repeating unit is called
the period for Y equals cosine of x, the period is two pi. Notice that the period is the horizontal
distance between successive peaks, or maximum points, or between successive troughs, or
minimum points. algebraically, we can write cosine of x plus two pi equals cosine of x
and sine of x plus two pi equals sine of x to indicate that the functions repeat themselves
over an interval of two pi and have a period of two pi. In this video, we graphed y equals
cosine of x and y equals sine of x. and observe that they both have a midline at y equals
zero, an amplitude of one and a period of two pi. sine u sort of functions are functions
that are related to sine and cosine by transformations like stretching and shrinking and shifting.
This video is about graphing these functions. Let's start by graphing the function, y equals
three sine of 2x. This function is related to the function y equals sine x. So I'll graph
that first. Now, the three on the outside stretches this graph vertically by a factor
of three, while the two on the inside compresses that horizontally by a factor of one half.
If instead I want to graph y equals three sine 2x plus one, this plus one on the outside
shifts everything up by one unit. Let's compare the midline amplitude and period of our original
y equals sine x are transformed y equals three sine 2x. And our further transformed y equals
three sine 2x plus one, the original sine has a midline at y equals zero, an amplitude
of one and a period of two pi. For the transformed function, y equals three times sine of 2x.
The two on the inside shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half. So it changes the
period of two pi into a period of one half times two pi, which is pi. Since the two on the inside only affects x
values and horizontal distances, it doesn't affect the midline, which is a y value, or
the amplitude, which is a vertical distance. But the three on the outside does affect these
things. Well, in particular, it affects the amplitude, since everything is stretched out
vertically by a factor of three, the amplitude of one get stretch to an amplitude of three.
In this case, the midline doesn't actually change, because multiplying a y value of zero
by three is still a y value of zero. Now on the third function, we've taken the second
function and added one on the outside, so that shifts everything up by one. Therefore,
instead of having a midline at y equals zero, we now have a midline at y equals one. The
amplitude doesn't change though it's still three because shifting everything up by one
doesn't affect the distance between the mid mind and the end the maximum point. Also,
the period is still pi since the period is a horizontal measure, and adding one on the
outside only affects vertical things. Now next, let's graph the function y equals three
times sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four. This function is very closely related
to the First function we graphed on the previous page, that was y equals three sine of 2x.
In fact, if we give the name f of x to that function, and maybe we can call g of x, this
other function, then we can get g of x by taking f of x and plugging in x minus pi over
four in for x. In other words, g of x is f of x minus pi over four. This relationship
gives me an idea for graphing g of x, the function we want to graph, we can first graph
f of x, we already did that on the previous page. And then we can shift its graph to the
right by pi over four, because that's what you do when you subtract a number on the inside
of a function. So here's the graph of y equals three sine 2x. Recall that it's just the graph
of sine stretched vertically by a factor of three, and shrunk horizontally by a factor
of one half. Now, to graph the function that I want, I'm going to shift this graph over
by pi over four to the right. Notice that since I had my function written in factored
form, I could just read off the horizontal shift. But if I had written it instead, as
y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two, which is algebraically equivalent, it would
be easy to get confused and think that I needed to shift over by pi over two. So it's best
to factor first, before figuring out what the shift is, we're factoring out the coefficient
of x. If instead, we wanted to graph this function, same as the one we just graphed,
it's just with a minus one on the outside, that minus one would just bring everything
down by one. Let's take a moment to look at midline amplitude, and period for the original
parent function, y equals sine of x, and our final transformed function, y equals three
sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four minus one, our original sine function
has midline at y equals zero amplitude of one and period of two pi. For our transform
function, the three on the outside stretches vertically, so it makes the amplitude three.
The minus one on the outside shifts everything down by one. So it brings the midline, y equals
zero, down to Y equals negative one, the two on the inside, shrinks everything horizontally
by a factor of one half. So the period becomes one half times two pi, which is pi. Finally,
there's a horizontal shift going on our transformed function shifts to the right, by pi over four,
this horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift. The function we just analyzed
was y equals three sine 2x minus pi over four minus one, which could also be written as
y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two minus one. This is a function of the form y equals
a sine B x minus c plus d, where b is positive. If we have a function of this form, or the
similar function with cosine in it, then we know that the midline is going to be at y
equals D. That's because the original midline of sine or cosine at y equals zero gets shifted
up by D, we know that the amplitude is going to be a because this A multiplied on the outside
stretches everything vertically by a factor of A. to be a little more accurate, we should say
the amplitude is the absolute value of A in case a is negative. If a is negative, then
that amounts to a vertical reflection or a reflection over the x axis. We know that the
period of the original sine or cosine is two pi. And we know that this factor of B amounts
to a horizontal shrink by a factor of one over B or I guess it could be a horizontal
stretch by a factor of one over b If b is less than one, so because we're starting with
a period of two pi, and we're multiplying by one over B, our new period is going to
be two Pi over B. The trickiest thing is the horizontal shift. And to get that right, I
like to factor out this B for my equation. So instead of writing y equals a cosine bx
minus c plus d, I'm going to write y equals A cosine B times quantity x minus c over b
plus d. Similarly, if it's a sine function, I write y equals a sine B times x minus quantity
c over b plus d, then I can read off the horizontal shift as C over B. And that'll be a shift
to the right, if C over B is positive and a shift to the left, if C over b is negative,
this might seem backwards from what you're used to, but it's because we have that minus
sign there. So if C over B is positive, we're actually subtracting on the inside. So that
shifts right, if C of b over b is negative minus a negative is actually adding something,
and that's why it shifts it to the left. So as one final example, say I wanted to graph
y equals 1/3, cosine of one half x plus three minus five, that would have a midline at y
equals minus five, an amplitude of 1/3, a period of two pi divided by one half, which
is four pi, and a horizontal shift. Better rewrite this horizontal shift of six units
to the left, the horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift. And that's all for
graphs of sinusoidal functions. This video is about graphing the trig functions, tangent,
secant, cotangent and cosecant. To gain an intuition for the graph of y equals tangent
of x, I think it's handy to look at the slope of a line at angle theta on the unit circle.
The slope of this line is the rise over the run. But the rise is given by sine of theta,
and the run is given by cosine of theta. So the slope is given by sine theta over cosine
theta, which is simply tan of theta. So if I want to graph y equals tan of x, I can think
of x as being the angle and y as being the slope of the line at that angle. Notice if
the angle is zero, the slope is zero. But as the angle increases towards pi over two,
the slope gets bigger and bigger heading towards infinity. As the angle goes from zero towards
negative pi over two, the slope is getting negative and heading towards negative infinity
at exactly pi over two and negative pi over two, we have a vertical line. And so the slope
is undefined. Using this information, let's graph a rough
sketch of y equals tan x. Remember, we're thinking of x as the angle and y as the slope,
we're going to go between an angle of negative pi over two and pi over two. So we said that
the slope was zero when the angle is zero, and then it heads up towards positive infinity
as we go towards the angle goes towards pi over two with an undefined value at pi over
two, it goes negative heading towards negative infinity as the angle heads towards negative
pi over two, also with an undefined value at negative pi over two. You can also verify
that for angles slightly bigger than pi over two, we have the same line as for angles that
are approaching negative pi over two, and therefore this picture repeats and it turns
out that tangent is periodic With period not to pi, like sine and cosine, but just pi,
the period of pi makes sense because if you take a line and rotate it by 180 degrees,
it's the same line with the same slope, and therefore has the same value of tangents.
In this graph of y equals 10x, notice that the x intercepts, all right values of x have
the form negative two pi, negative pi, zero, pi, two pi, etc, you can write that as pi
times k, where k is an integer, that is a positive or negative whole number or zero.
This makes a lot of sense because tangent of x is sine of x over cosine of x. And so
you're going to get x intercepts, that's where y is zero, which is where the numerator is
zero, and sine x is zero, at values of the form pi, two pi, and so on. From the graph,
you can see the vertical asymptotes are at values like negative three pi over two, negative
pi over two, pi over two, and three pi over two, these values can be written as pi over
two times k, where k is an odd integer. Again, this makes sense from the definition of tangents
since vertical asymptotes, will occur where the denominator is zero, and cosine x is zero,
at numbers, like negative pi over two pi over two, three pi over two, and so on, the domain
of tangent is the x axis for which it's defined. So that's going to be everything except for
the vertical asymptotes, we can write that as x such that x is not equal to pi over two
times k, for K, an odd integer. The range or the y values go all the way from negative
infinity to infinity. And the period, as we mentioned previously, is pi. Since the smallest
repeating unit has a horizontal width of pi, to graph y equals secant x, I'm going to remember
that secant is one over cosine. So if I start with a graph of cosine, I can take the reciprocal
of the y values to get the graph of secant, the reciprocal of one is one, the reciprocal
of zero is undefined, so I'm not going to have a value at pi over two, negative pi over
two, three pi over two, or negative three pi over two. When I take the reciprocal of
numbers, just less than one, I'm going to get numbers just greater than one, but I would
take the reciprocal of positive numbers getting close to zero, I'm going to get really big
positive numbers going up towards infinity. Similarly, on the other side, over here, I
have numbers close to zero, but negative, so their reciprocals will be negative numbers
heading towards negative infinity. The reciprocal of negative one is negative one. And similarly
here, so I'm getting kind of positive and negative buckets and upside down buckets as
the graph of my sequence. Notice that secant has a period of two pi,
which makes sense, since cosine has a period of two pi, it has a range that goes from negative
infinity to negative one inclusive, and from one to infinity. That makes sense because
the range of cosine is between one and negative one, and we're taking the reciprocal of those
values. The domain is everything except for the vertical asymptotes. Now the vertical
asymptotes are where cosine is zero. So that is at values of the form pi over two, three
pi over two, etc. That's values of the form pi over 2k, where k is an odd integer. So
the domain is going to be x values such that x is not equal to pi over 2k. For K and odd
integer. The x intercepts of secant Well, it doesn't have any, because you can't take
one over something and get the numbers zero for your y value. We've seen the graph of
y equals Tana x and y equals secant x. This is the graph of y equals cotangent x. It looks
similar to the graph of tangent x, it's just a decreasing function instead of an increasing
one, and it has its vertical asymptotes. And it's x intercepts in different places. Finally,
this green graph is the graph of y equals cosecant x. It's related to the graph of sine
x, since cosecant is one over sine x, and in fact, if I draw the graph of sine x in
between, you can see how it kind of bounces off. Because it's the reciprocal. I encourage
you to memorize the general shape of these graphs, you can always figure out the details
by thinking how about how they're related to the graphs of cosine of x, and sine x.
This video is an introduction to solving trig equations. Let's start with the equation two
cosine x plus one equals zero, I want to find all the solutions in the interval from zero
to two pi, and then get a general formula for all solutions, not just those in that
interval. Let me start by rewriting this equation to isolate the tricky part, which is cosine
of x. So I'm going to write to cosine x equals negative one, and then divide both sides by
two. Now I'm looking for the angles x between zero and two pi, whose cosine is negative
one half. Since negative one half is one of the special values on the unit circle, I can
use my knowledge of the unit circle, to see that the angle between zero and two pi must
be either two pi over three, or four pi over three, my answer needs to include both of
these values. There are no other spots on the unit circle whose cosine is negative one
half. But there are more angles, because we can always take one of these angles and add
multiples of two pi to it. So if I want to find all solutions, I can take these two principles
solutions, two pi over three, and four pi over three, and simply add multiples of two
pi to them. For example, two pi over three plus two pi, or two pi over three minus two
pi, two pi over three plus four pi, and so on. A much more efficient way to write this
is to write two pi over three plus two pi times k, any integer that is any positive
or negative whole number or zero. Similarly, I can write four pi over three plus two pi
k, to capture all solutions, based on the principal solution for pi over three by adding
and subtracting multiples of two pi. This is my final solution. Next, let's look
at a tricky equation involving tangent. As usual, I'm going to start out by cleaning
things up and isolating the tricky part, which in this case is tangent. So let me add tangent
to both sides. That'll give me three, tan x equals the square root of three. And so
tan x is the square root of three over three. The square root of three over three looks
suspiciously similar to value the value of square to three over two, which is a special
value on my unit circle. So my suspicion is that my unit circle will again help me find
this value of x without a calculator. Recall that tan x is sine x over cosine x. So I'm
looking for angles on the unit circle between zero and two pi with a ratio of sine over
cosine will give me square root of three over three, I actually only need to look in the
first quadrant and the third quadrant, because those are the quadrants where a tangent is
positive. And I really only need to look at angles whose either sine or cosine has a squared
of three in it. So by trial and error, I can see that tan pi over six, which is sine pi
over six over cosine pi over six will give me one half over root three over two That's
the same thing as one half times two over three, which is one over root three. If I
rationalize that, I get root three over three, so that value works. If I try tan of pi over
three, instead, I get root three, which is not equal to root three over three. So pi
over three doesn't work. Similarly, I can work out some the values in the third quadrant,
and see that seven pi over six works. But four pi over three does not. So my answer
to part A includes just the two values, pi over six, and seven pi over six. Now if I
want to find all solutions, not just those in the interval from zero to two pi, I noticed
that I can take one of these principal solutions, and add multiples of two pi to it, because
that'll give me the same angle. So I get pi over six plus two pi k, and pi over six, sorry,
seven pi over six plus two pi, K, any integer. This is a correct answer. But it's not as
simple as it could be. Notice that seven pi over six over here on the unit circle is exactly
pi more than pi over six. So instead of taking both of these and adding multiples of two
pi to them, I could get all the same answers by just taking one of them and adding multiples
of pi to it. So a more efficient answer is to say that x equals pi over six, plus pi
times k, for K any integer. This will still capture all the same solutions. Because when
k is even, I'll get this family solutions. And when k is odd, I'll get this family. For
example, when k is one, pi over six plus one times pi is just the original seven pi over
six. If you think about the fact that tangent has a period of pi, instead of two pi, it
makes a lot of sense that you should be able to write the solutions in this form. In this
video, we solved basic trig equations by first isolating sine, or tangent, or the same thing
would work with cosine. And then using the unit circle, to find principal solutions.
Principal solutions are just solutions between zero and two pi. And then adding multiples
of two pi to these principal solutions to get all solutions. For tangent, we noticed
that it was equivalent to just use one principal solution and add multiples of pi instead of
two pi. In this video, we'll introduce the idea of the derivative using graphs, secant
lines and tangent lines. So I have a function here, drawn in black,
the function is y equals f of x. But actually here f of x equals x squared. I also have
a tangent line to my function drawn in red. This tangent line is the tangent line at the
point 1.5 2.25. By a tangent line, I mean a line that touches the graph of my function
at this one point, and heads off in the same direction as the function. Well, normally
to compute the slope, we need two points. But for the tangent line, we really only have
the exact coordinates of this one point, we could approximate the slope by guessing the
coordinates of some other points on the red line. But in the long run, we'll end up with
a more accurate estimate if we do something else. So what we're going to do instead is
we're going to calculate the slope of a secant line. A secant line is a line that goes through
two points on my graph. So in this case, my secant line is going through my original point,
and this other point at x equals three. So that's the point three, three squared or three
nine. Okay, so here's my secant line. To calculate the slope of my secant line, I use the fact
that slope is rise over run. Or in other words, it's the change in y over the change in x.
And that's going to be written in function notation. F of three minus f of 1.5 is giving
me the change in y and three minus one point gives me the change in x. Wilson's f of x
is x squared, this is the same thing as three squared minus 1.5 squared over three minus
1.5. So that's just nine minus 2.25, over 1.5, which ends up as 4.5. So 4.5 is the slope
of this second line. Well, the idea here is that the slope of my secant line is an approximation
of the slope of my tangent line. But in this example, really the secant line that I've
used, it's, its slope is only a very rough approximation of the tangent line, not very
accurate, all. So how could I get a better approximation of the slope of my tangent line?
Well, one thing I could do is I could use as my second point, instead of using this
point way out here, I could use a point closer to my first point. So for example, I could
use the point two, f of two. In other words, the point two, four, as my second point for
my second line, so let me draw that. And let me calculate its slope, which after some arithmetic
is going to give me an answer of 3.5. Well, I could continue to pick second points for
my secant line, closer and closer to my first point. And I should end up with more and more
accurate approximations of my tangent line, let me make a little chart for this. For my
next secant line, I could take my second point, something pretty close to 1.5, say 1.6. And
after some arithmetic, I get a slope of 3.1. To take my second point to be 1.51, that's
going to give me a slope of 3.01, and so on. To write this more generally, if I take my
second point as x, then the slope of my secant line is going to be given by again the rise
over the run. So that's going to be f of x minus f of 1.5 divided by x minus 1.5. Change
in y over the change in x, that's my slope. Now, there's no reason I necessarily have
to take my second point to be on the right side of my first point, I could be using stead
points on the left side here. Continue with my chart, letting my second point be one,
I can do the same computations to get a slope of a secant line of 2.5. Here, I could get
even closer on the left, say something like 1.4 and get a slope of 2.9, and so on. In
general, if I have a point x f of x, and I use a secant line through that point in our
original point, I calculate the slope as change in y over change in x, which is going to be
f of 1.5 minus f of x divided by 1.5 minus x. Actually, I can rewrite this a little bit
to make it look more like the expression up here. If I multiply the numerator and denominator
by negative one, then I can rewrite this as f of x minus f of 1.5 divided by x minus 1.5.
So that these two expressions look exactly the same. So the only difference here on my
mind is that over here, I was thinking of x as being a little bit bigger than 1.5. And
here I'm thinking of x as being a little smaller than 1.5. But I get the exact same expression
for the slope of the secant line either way. Now, this process of picking points closer
and closer to our original point from the left, and from the right, should remind you
of limits. And indeed, the slope of the tangent line is the limit as x goes to 1.5 of the
slope of my secant lines, which are given by this expression. This quantity is so important
that's given its own name, it's called the derivative of f of x at x equals 1.5. So in
other words, the derivative which is written as f prime at 1.5, is the limit as x goes
to 1.5 of f of x minus f of 1.5 over x minus 1.5. Now based on our numerical tables, for
example, here, we can see that that limit seems to be heading towards three, whether
X approaches 1.5, from the right or from the left. So I'll write down the answer of three.
You know, it's pretty strong. If you wanted to have a really precise argument. We'd actually
need to use algebra to compute this limit. Exactly using the formula for the function
itself, f of x equals x squared. And we'll do examples like that in a future video. But
for now, the main point is just that the slope of the tangent line is the limit of the slope
of the secant lines, which is given by this formula. For now, let's look at an animation
that shows how the slope of our secant lines approach the slope of our tangent line. So
this black curve here is the function y equals x squared. The red line is the tangent line
through the point where x equals 1.5. And the blue line is a secant line that goes through
the point with x coordinate 1.5. And a second point with x coordinate 2.5. The points are
shown here on the right. So I'm going to use this slider here and drag my second point
closer to my first point. So notice how as the x coordinate, my second point gets closer
and closer to 1.5. My secant line is getting closer and closer to my tangent line. So the
slope of my tangent line really is the limit of the slope of my secant lines, as my x coordinate
of my second point goes to 1.5. So this is true, even if I start with my second point
on the left instead of the right, as I drag that second point closer and closer to the
first point, the slope of my secant lines gets closer and closer to the slope of that
red tangent line. We saw in our example, that the slope of our tangent line, or the derivative
at 1.5, was given by the limit as x goes to 1.5 of f of x minus f of 1.5 divided by x
minus 1.5. Well, in general, the derivative of a function y equals f of x at an x value
a is given by f prime of A equals the limit as x goes to a of f of x minus F of A over
x minus a, the function is said to be differentiable at A. If this limit exists. In particular,
both the limit from the left and a limit from the right have to exist and be equal for the
function to be differentiable at x equals a. There's another equivalent version of the
definition of derivative that's very common and very useful. If we're looking at the graph
of a function, I'm trying to calculate the slope of the secant line between the points
A, F of A and x f of x, then let's introduce the letter H to be the quantity x minus a.
So h represents the run, when I'm calculating the slope of this secant line, I can write
H equals x minus a, or equivalently x equals a plus H. And so I can rewrite the definition
of derivative in terms of H as f prime of A equals the limit as x goes to a of f of
a plus h minus F of A divided by h, just by substituting in this expression for x. And
h for x minus a. Well as x goes to a, x minus a is going to zero. In other words, h is going
to zero. So this is equivalent to the limit as h goes to zero of f of a plus h minus f
of a over h. One way to think of this is that we're just relabeling this point right here,
as the point A plus h, f of a plus H. And the slope of the tangent line is still the
limit of the rise over the run as the run goes to zero, this is the definition of derivative
that we'll use most frequently going forward when we actually calculate derivatives based
on the definition in future videos. But for now, let's look at some examples to practice
recognizing the derivative rather than computing it. So each of these following two expressions
are supposed to represent the derivative of some function at some value a. So for each
example, we're supposed to find the function and figure out the value of A. Now remember,
we've got two definitions of derivative going on. They're both equivalent, but they look
different. One of them looks like derivative of f at a is the limit as x goes to a of f
of x minus F of A over x minus a. And the other version is the limit as h goes to zero
of f of a plus h minus f of a over h. Now, you might notice That our first expression
looks more like this first definition, because x is going to some number that's not zero.
And we have both x and a number in the denominator here. Whereas our second expression looks
more like the second definition, we've got the age going to zero, and we've just got
the age on the denominator here. Okay, so let's look at this first one here. First,
let's figure out what A is here. It seems like a has got to be negative one. Since x
is approaching negative one. That kind of makes sense, because now here on the denominator,
x plus one could be thought of as x minus negative one. So that's our x minus a with
a is negative one. Okay, great. So we've got a, now we need to find an F. And we will need
the numerator here to look like f of x minus f of a, well, let's try the simplest thing,
we can, let's try f of x equals x plus five squared, then X plus five squared is our f
of x. and f of a is our f of negative one is going to be negative one plus five squared,
which is 16. So that matches up perfectly, we've got our f of x here, our f of a here,
and our x minus a at the bottom. That's exactly the definition of derivative done the first
one. All right, now the second one. Now, again, we need to figure out what a is. And we need
to find figure out what f is. This part of the expression here is supposed to be f of
a plus h. So I'm going to guess, make a guess here, that f of x should be three to some
power, let's just try three to the X and see how that works. Now we need this nine to be
f of a. So nine has to be three to the A. And the only way that can work is if a is
two. So continuing on the top, we need f of a plus h, that is f of two plus h, two B three to the two plus H and that actually
works perfectly. If our f of x is three to the x, it's all falling into place. So we've
got our f of two plus h, r f of two, and r h. And it all works where f of x being three
to the x and a being two. In this video, we introduced the idea of derivative as a slope
of a tangent line. And we gave two equivalent definitions of the derivative in terms of
limits. We'll continue with some interpretations of derivatives in the next video. This video
is algebraically intensive, and is concerned with calculating derivatives using the limit
definition of derivative. Well, there are actually two versions of the limit definition
of derivative. And I'll mostly use this one, the limit as h goes to zero of f of a plus
h minus f of a over h. If you're interested, you can try reworking the problems using the
alternative definition of derivative. The limit as x goes to a of f of x minus F of
A over x minus a first example, find the derivative of f of x, which is one over the square root
of three minus x at x equals negative one. Well, in other words, we want to find f prime
of negative one. So that's the limit as h goes to zero of f of negative one plus h minus
f of negative one over h. Using our definition of f, that's the limit of one over the square
root of three minus negative one plus h minus one over the square root of three minus negative
one, all over h. Let me clean this up a bit. So this is one over the square root of, let's
see, it's three minus negative one, so that's three plus one, or four minus h minus one
over the square root of four over h. And I guess I can replace the square
root of four with two. Now, unfortunately, I can't just evaluate
this by plugging in H equals zero, because if I try that, I get one of these zero over
zero indeterminate forms. You'll run across these a lot when calculating derivatives by
definition, it kind of makes sense because remember the context where computing slopes
of secant lines as these points get closer and closer together. So our rise and our runs
are both going to zero. So it makes sense, we'll get these zero or zero indeterminate
forms, we have to use our algebraic tricks that we learned before, for rewriting our
expression in a way that we can calculate the limit. And I see two things going on here,
there's square roots lurking, and there's also fractions. So it's anybody's guess which
trick I might want to apply First, the trick for square roots, which would be multiplying
the top and the bottom by the conjugate. And the trick for fractions, which would be adding
together my fraction for the common denominator. I guess I'll try my fraction trick first.
So my common denominator for my two fractions here, is just the product of these two denominators.
So that's the square root of four minus h times two. Let me rewrite my fractions with
this common denominator. Continuing here, I get the limit of two minus the square root
of four minus h over squared, a four minus h times two, all over h. instead of dividing
by H, let me multiply by one over h. And let's see here, let's see if we can evaluate by
plugging in H equals zero at this stage. Unfortunately, when I try to plug in, I'm still getting the
zero of zero indeterminate form. But I'm not out of tricks, I haven't used the conjugate
trick yet. So let's try multiplying the top and the bottom by the conjugate of the top.
Once I multiply out here, I'll get four plus two square to four minus h minus two square
to four minus h, minus the square root of four minus h squared, that's going to cancel
out nicely. And on the bottom, I have two h squared of four minus h times two plus square
to four minus h, I'll leave that factored for now. That's good thing, I have unlimited
space here, I'm kind of need it. Now on the numerator, I'm going to get four minus four
minus h, is carrying the denominator along for the ride now, oh, I see something good.
I see in the numerator, we're getting a four minus four plus H. Subtracting out those fours
to zero, and then cancelling out, my H is that divide by each other, I think I finally
got something that I can evaluate without getting a zero over zero indeterminate form.
All right, so here we've got. So as h goes to zero, I'm just going to get one over two
times the square root of four times two plus a squared of four, which equals 1/16. So by
now, you may have forgotten what the original problem was, I think I have it, let's go back
up here, we were looking for the derivative of f of x, which was one over a squared of
three minus x at x equals negative one, we set up the limit definition, did a bunch of
algebra first adding together fractions, then using the conjugate trick, and eventually
found that that derivative equaled 1/16. The algebra doesn't get much harder than this
problem here. In this next example, we're asked to find the equation of the tangent
line to y equals x cubed minus 3x at x equals two. So the slope of the tangent line is given
by the derivative, f prime of two. So let's calculate the derivative first. f prime of
two is the limit as h goes to zero of f of two plus h minus f of two, all over h. So
that's the limit of two plus h cubed minus three times two plus h minus two cubed minus three times two. I'm just
plugging in first two plus h for x in the definition of my function, and then I'm plugging
in two for x. Now all of that needs to be over h. Once again, if I try to plug in zero
for H in these expressions, I'm just gonna get something that all cancels out to zero
at the top, and also have zero at the bottom, one of my classic zero over zero indeterminate
forms. So instead, I need to use algebra to simplify things. And hope I can calculate
the limit after that. So a good trick for simplifying here is to multiply out two plus
h cubed multiplies out to two cubed, plus three times two squared times h, plus three
times two times h squared plus h cubed. I'm getting this from the formula for multiplying
out of cubic which I've memorized. But you can also get it more slowly just by writing
out two plus h times itself three times and, and distributing. Now I need to subtract three
times two, and three times h. And finally, I needed to subtract my two cubed and then
add my three times to all this over h. Now if you have my terms cancel out to zero here,
two cubed minus two cubed. And let's see I've got a minus three times two and a plus three
times two. And I notice all the terms that are left have H's and so I'm going to factor
out an H from the top from the remaining terms here. And that gives me let's say, three times
two squared, so that's 12, plus six H, plus h squared minus three over h. Now, h divided
by h is one. So I'm just left with the limit as h goes to zero of 12 plus six h plus h
squared minus three, as h goes to zero, I can just plug in H zero, and I get 12 minus
three, which is nine. So my slope of my tangent line, my derivative is nine. I'm not quite
done, I still need to find the equation of the tangent line, I just know that its slope
is nine. So the equation of the tangent line equation of any line is something like y equals
mx plus b. and here m is nine. So I have y equals 9x plus b, I just need to find the
intercept B. Now, usually, to find the intercept, I need a plug in a point. what point do I
have here to plug in? Well, remember, we're talking about a tangent line here. So we've
got the point of tangency, the point where x equals two, and the corresponding y value
is y equals two cubed minus three times two, or two. So my tangent line has to go through
the point to two, which means if I plug in this point for x and y, I get two equals nine
times two plus b, which means that B has to equal negative 16. So the equation of my tangent
line then becomes y equals 9x minus 16. I found that by first calculating the derivative
to get my slope, and then using the point of tangency, plugging in the x value to get
the y value, and plugging Matt in to get b to finish off the equation. So in this video,
we used our tricks for evaluating limits algebraically to compute some derivatives, using the definition
of derivative. This is pretty labor intensive. So fortunately, pretty soon, we'll learn some
shortcut methods for calculating derivatives without resorting to the definition. We've
seen that the derivative of a function y equals f of x at a point, x equals A represents the
slope of a tangent line through the point A f of a. But if the function f of x represents
some practical quantity, like distance as a function of time, or fuel efficiency as
a function of speed, then the derivative will also have a practical interpretation. This
video is about interpreting the derivative in different contexts. One of the most famous contexts for interpreting
derivatives is problems involving motion. So let's say I'm on a bike ride, heading straight
north from campus. And let's suppose that y equals f of x represents my distance from
campus. So x is the time and hours and y or f of x is my distance and miles, the distance
away from campus. Distance north of campus. It's kind of fun to see what this graph here
means in terms of my bike ride. In particular, what's going on up here, where my y values
reach their maximum. And what about here, where my function is constant. Please pause
the video for a moment and see if you can make up a story that fits the graph. So here
at the top, my distance is no longer increasing, it's actually starting to decrease. So I must
have turned around and be heading back towards campus again, over here, where my f of x is
constant, I probably stopped at a coffee shop to take a rest or maybe I'm fixing a flat
tire. Now let's get to the questions at hand. Consider these two points, three, f of three,
and four F of four, we want to interpret the slope of the secant line through those two
points. Slope is change in y over change in x. And y here is distance and x here is time.
So change in distance over change in time. Sounds a lot like speed, or more accurately,
velocity. Velocity just means speed in a certain direction, and is positive. If distance is
increasing, and negative if it's decreasing. Speed is the absolute value of velocity, and
there's always positive or zero. So in our case, the velocity here must be negative,
because our distance is decreasing. And we could estimate it very roughly as about, say
four minus 12 over four minus three, so about negative eight miles per hour. But what is
this negative eight miles per hour refer to. Since we're looking at the change in distance,
over this entire hour long interval, the slope of my secant line gives my average velocity
over this interval. It doesn't give my exact velocity, and exactly three hours or exactly
four hours, only my average velocity. If I want to know my exact velocity at exactly
three hours, I need to look instead at the slope of the tangent line at x equals three.
The velocity at an exact instant of time is sometimes called the instantaneous velocity
to distinguish it from the average velocity over a time interval. Let's think for a minute
about why the velocity at exactly three hours is given by the slope of the tangent line.
We saw in a previous video that the slope of the tangent line is the limit of the slope
of the secant lines More precisely, the limit as x goes to three of f of x minus f of three
over x minus three. Wow, well, each of these ratios represents an average velocity on the
interval from three to x. And so the limit is the limit of average velocities on tinier
and tinier intervals of time, one minute, one second 100th of a second, in the limit,
as the length of the time interval goes to zero, we're going to get the exact velocity
at exactly three hours. So to repeat, in this example, the slope of the secant line represents
the average velocity over time interval, and the derivative at x equals three, written
f prime of three, which is also the slope of the tangent line, that derivative represents
the instantaneous velocity at x equals three. More generally, if f of x represents any quantity
that's changing, then the slope of the secant line represents an average rate of change.
While the slope of the tangent line, f prime of a represents an instantaneous rate of change.
Let's see how that works in a couple of other examples. Let's suppose that f of x represents
the temperature of a cup of coffee and degrees Fahrenheit as a function of time and minutes
since he said it on the counter. So let's interpret the first equation. f of zero is
140. Well, that just means that at time zero, the temperature is 140 degrees. What about
the equation f of 10 minus f of zero is negative 20. That's saying that the temperature goes
down by 20 degrees as x the time goes from zero to 10 minutes. Now, what about this quotient
here being equal to negative two? Well, this quotient looks a lot like the slope of a secant
Why, right, so it must be an average rate of change. And in this context, we have the
temperature is decreasing by an average of two degrees per minute, as x changes from
zero to 10 minutes. Finally, the derivative of f at 15 is negative point five means that
at exactly 15 minutes, the temperature is decreasing at a rate of point five degrees
per minute. negative numbers here always mean decreasing, and f prime is an instantaneous
rate of change. Let's look at another example. Please pause the video and try this one for
yourself. Here g of x represents the fuel efficiency of a Toyota Prius and mpg as a
function of x, the speed in miles per hour that is traveling g of 45 is 52 means that
at 45 miles per hour, the fuel efficiency is 52 miles per gallon. The second statement
is saying that as speed increases from 35 to 45 miles per hour, fuel efficiency goes
up by 10. That's 10 miles per gallon. The third statement says that the average rate
of change of fuel efficiency is two miles per gallon
per mile per hour, as speed increases from 35 to 40 miles per hour. So going up from
35 to 40, gives you better fuel efficiency here. On the other hand, when you're going
60 miles per hour, your fuel efficiency is decreasing at a rate of two miles per gallon
per mile per hour. So I bet the optimal fuel efficiency here occurs somewhere between 40
and 60 miles per hour. In this video, we've interpreted the slope of the secant line as
the average rate of change, and the slope of the tangent line with the derivative as
an instantaneous rate of change. I hope that these general principles will help you interpret
the derivative in a variety of contexts that you might encounter throughout your life.
In this video, we'll think of the derivative of a function as being a function in itself,
we relate the graph of a function to the graph of its derivative, and we'll talk about where
the derivative does not exist. We've seen that for a function f of x and a number A,
the derivative of f of x at x equals A is given by this formula. But what if we let
a very, if we compute f prime of a lots of different values of a, we can think of the
derivative of f prime as itself being a function, I'm going to rewrite this definition of derivative
with x in the place of a just to make it look a little more like standard function notation.
So f prime as a function of x is the limit as h goes to zero of f of x plus h minus f
of x over h. This isn't anything substantially different from what we've been doing before,
it's just a difference in perspective. So let's do one more example of computing the
derivative by hand using the definition, but a general number x instead of a specific value,
the function we're going to use is f of x equals one over x. And first, let's just write
down the definition of derivative in general. So f prime of x is given by this formula.
And using the fact that f of x is one over x, I can rewrite this as one over x plus h
minus one over x all over h. So as usual, this is a zero over zero indeterminate form.
If I plug in zero for H, I'm just going to get one over x minus one over x on the numerator,
which is zero. and plugging in zero for H gives me zero on the denominator two. So I'll
need to use some algebra to rewrite things to get an A form that I can evaluate it. Let's
add together our fractions in the numerator here. The common denominator I need to use
is x plus h times x. So I multiply this fraction by x over x and the next fraction by x plus
h over x plus h. All that's over h. And now continuing, I get x minus x plus h over x
plus h times X and instead of dividing the whole thing by h here, multiply by one over
h to get the limit have x minus x minus h over x plus h times x times h. Now I can subtract
off my x's here. And after I do that, I can divide my minus h by my H, to get just a minus
one on the numerator here. So that's just the limit of negative one over x plus h times
x. And now I'm in a good position because I can plug in H equals zero and get something
that makes sense. Namely, I'm getting a limit of negative one over x plus zero times x or
negative one over x squared as my derivative. In this example, we're given the graph of
a function that's supposed to represent the height of an alien spaceship above the Earth's
surface, we want to graph the rate of change. The rate of change means the derivative of
our function, but we're not given an equation to work with. So we'll just have to estimate
the derivative based on the shape of the graph by thinking about slopes of tangent lines.
I'll start by drawing a new set of axes where I can graph my derivative. And I'll consider
my original function, which I'll call g of x, piece by piece. For x values between zero and two, my original
function g of x looks like a line, it has slope negative one, since the rise is negative
two, while the run is two, for any point on the straight line segment, the tangent line
will also be a straight line with slope negative one, and therefore, the derivative will be
negative one. For x values between zero and two, I'm going to ignore the time being what
happens when x is exactly zero or exactly two, and just look at the interval of X values
between two and three. Here, g of x is completely flat. So tangent lines at any of these points
will have slope zero. And I'll draw a derivative of zero. When x is between two and three,
I'll postpone worrying about the derivative when x is exactly three. And just think about
the derivative when x is between three and five, where g of x is flat again, so it's
tangent lines will have slopes of zero. And I'll draw again, a derivative is zero when
x is between three and five. Now things get a little more interesting. As x increases
from five to about seven, g of x is an increasing function. The slope of tangent lines here
are positive, starting at about, say, a slope of three, and decreasing to a slope of zero,
when x is seven, I can draw that down here. As x increases from seven, the tangent lines
now have negative slopes, going to a maximum negative slope of about negative one here,
and then heading towards a slope of zero, when x is just shy of 10. My estimates of
three and negative one for the slopes of my tangent lines are just rough estimates based
on approximating the rise over the run. As x increases from 10, the tangent line slope
is positive, and getting steeper and steeper, so my derivative is going to be positive and
increasing. That's the basic shape of the derivative. Now let's see what happens at
these special points like 235 and zero. To figure out the derivative at x equals two,
let's go back to the definition of derivative as the limit of the slopes of the secant lines.
If I draw a secant line, using a point on the left, I'll just get this line that lines
up with this line and has a slope of negative one. But if I compute the slope of a secant
line, using a point on the right, I'll get a slope of zero. So the limit from the left
and the limit from the right of the slopes of my secret lines will be different. And
so my limit does not exist and my derivative does not exist. And so I'll just draw this
as an open circle at x equals two. Next, let's look at the derivative when x equals three.
Remember that the derivative at three is the limit as h goes to zero, of g of three plus
h minus g of three over eight. Well, if H is bigger than zero, then g of three plus
H is going to be about a half, because three plus H is to the right of three. On the other
hand, if H is less than zero, g of three, plus H is two, because three plus H is actually
a number less than three, g of three itself is equal to one half, based on the filled
in bubble here. so if we calculate the limit, as h goes to zero from the positive side,
we get the limit of one half minus one half over age, which is just the limit of zeros,
so that's zero. On the other hand, if we compute the limit from the left, we get the limit
of two minus a half over eight, which is the limit of three halves over h. And as h goes
to zero, that limit is negative infinity. So once again, the left limit and write limit
are not equal. And so the limit of the slopes of the secant lines does not exist, and there's
no derivative at x equals three. And I'll draw an open circle there to add x equals five, again, we have a corner.
And by the same sort of argument, we can conclude that the derivative does not exist. And finally,
when x equals zero, we can only have a limit from the right not the left. And so by that
sort of technical reason, we don't have a derivative at that left endpoint either. So
we've drawn a rough graph of the rate of change of the height of our alien spaceship, as it
comes closer to Earth beams down to pick up Earthlings and then makes us escape up to
the mothership. It's interesting to observe that the domain of the original function g
of x is from zero to infinity, but the domain of g prime is somewhat smaller, and just goes
from zero to two, then from two to three, then from three to five, and finally, from
five to infinity, missing some places where the function originally existed. We saw in
the previous example, that the derivative doesn't necessarily exist at all the x values
where the original function exists. Please pause the video for a moment and try
to come up with as many different ways as you can, that a derivative can fail to exist at an x value x equals a. Well, one kind of
boring way that a function can fail to have a derivative at x equals A is if f of
x itself fails to exist. at x equals a, for example, if it has a hole, like in this picture,
we saw in the previous example, with the alien spacecraft, that a derivative can fail to
exist when the function turns a corner. When we tried to evaluate the derivative in that
example, by taking the limit of the slope of the secant lines, the limit from the left,
and a limit from the right did not agree. A famous example of a function that turns
a corner is the absolute value function. For the absolute value function, f prime of x
is negative one, since the slope here is negative one, when x is less than zero, and it's positive
one when x is greater than zero, but f prime of zero itself does not exist. A function
with a casp also fails to have a derivative at the cusp. In the alien spaceship example,
we also saw that F can fail to have a derivative at a discontinuity. But there's another way
that a derivative can fail to exist, even when f has no cost per corner discontinuity.
Let's look at the function f of x equals x to the 1/3 graphed here, what's going on at
x equals zero. At that instant, the tangent line is a vertical with a slope that's infinite
or undefined. So the limit of the slopes of the secant lines will fail to exist because
it'll be infinite. A function is called differentiable at x equals a, if the derivative exists at
a function is differentiable on an open interval, if f is differentiable at every point in that
interval. So all of the examples on the previous slides are examples of places where
a function is not differentiable. All of these examples are important. But I'm going to focus
on the example involving discontinuity. In general, if f of x is not continuous at x
equals a, then f is not differentiable at x equals a. This is what we saw in the example
involving the jump discontinuity. an equivalent way of saying the same thing is that f is
differentiable at x equals a, then f has to be continuous at x previous slides are examples of places where
a function is not differentiable. All of these examples are important. But I'm going to focus
on the example involving discontinuity. In general, if f of x is not continuous at x
equals a, then f is not differentiable at x equals a. This is what we saw in the example
involving the jump discontinuity. an equivalent way of saying the same thing is that f is
differentiable at x equals a, then f has to be continuous at x equals a. equals a. However, if all we know is that f is continuous
at x equals a, then we can't conclude anything about whether or not is differentiable there,
f may or may not be differentiable at x equals a. Remember the square root example, the square
root of x is continuous at x equals zero, but it's not differentiable there because
of the corner. In this video, we related the graph of a function to the graph of its derivative.
By thinking about the slopes of tangent lines, we also looked at several ways that a derivative
can fail to exist at a point and noted that if a function is differentiable, it has to
be continuous. This video gives a proof that differentiable functions are continuous. What
we want to show here is that if a function is differentiable at a number x equals a,
then it's continuous at x equals a. Let me call the function f of x. And I'm going to
start out by writing down what it means for f of x to be differentiable at x equals a.
That means that the limit as x goes to a of f of x minus F of A over x minus a exists
and equals this finite number that we call f prime However, if all we know is that f is continuous
at x equals a, then we can't conclude anything about whether or not is differentiable there,
f may or may not be differentiable at x equals a. Remember the square root example, the square
root of x is continuous at x equals zero, but it's not differentiable there because
of the corner. In this video, we related the graph of a function to the graph of its derivative.
By thinking about the slopes of tangent lines, we also looked at several ways that a derivative
can fail to exist at a point and noted that if a function is differentiable, it has to
be continuous. This video gives a proof that differentiable functions are continuous. What
we want to show here is that if a function is differentiable at a number x equals a,
then it's continuous at x equals a. Let me call the function f of x. And I'm going to
start out by writing down what it means for f of x to be differentiable at x equals a.
That means that the limit as x goes to a of f of x minus F of A over x minus a exists
and equals this finite number that we call f prime of a. Now I'm going to multiply both sides
of this equation of a. Now I'm going to multiply both sides
of this equation by the limit as x goes to a of x minus a.
Now wait a second, before I go any further on to make sure this is legit. Does this limit
actually exist? Well, yeah, because the limit as x goes to a of x exists, that's just a,
and the limit as x goes to a of a exists, that's a also. So the limit of the difference
has to exist. And actually, that limit of the difference is the difference of the limits,
which is just going to be a minus a or a zero. So I've actually just multiplied both sides
by zero and a fancy form. by the limit as x goes to a of x minus a.
Now wait a second, before I go any further on to make sure this is legit. Does this limit
actually exist? Well, yeah, because the limit as x goes to a of x exists, that's just a,
and the limit as x goes to a of a exists, that's a also. So the limit of the difference
has to exist. And actually, that limit of the difference is the difference of the limits,
which is just going to be a minus a or a zero. So I've actually just multiplied both sides
by zero and a fancy form. This is actually a surprisingly useful thing
to do. Because I have a product of a limit of two limits here, both of which exist. So
by the product rule for limits, I can rewrite this as the limit as x goes to a This is actually a surprisingly useful thing
to do. Because I have a product of a limit of two limits here, both of which exist. So
by the product rule for limits, I can rewrite this as the limit as x goes to a of x minus a times f of x minus F of A over
x minus a. And canceling these two copies of x minus a, which is fine to do when x is
near a, just not when x equals a, I get that the limit of f of x minus f of a is equal
to this limit over here. Well, we said this limit was just zero. So my limit on the left
is equal to zero. of x minus a times f of x minus F of A over
x minus a. And canceling these two copies of x minus a, which is fine to do when x is
near a, just not when x equals a, I get that the limit of f of x minus f of a is equal
to this limit over here. Well, we said this limit was just zero. So my limit on the left
is equal to zero. And now I'm so close, I'd like to apply five
the limit rule to this difference to break it up into a difference of limits, but I can't
quite do that, because I'm not sure yet that the limit, as x goes to a of f of x exists,
that's sort of part of what I'm trying to prove as far as continuity. So instead, I
think I'm gonna add to both sides, a limit that I do know exists. And that's the limit And now I'm so close, I'd like to apply five
the limit rule to this difference to break it up into a difference of limits, but I can't
quite do that, because I'm not sure yet that the limit, as x goes to a of f of x exists,
that's sort of part of what I'm trying to prove as far as continuity. So instead, I
think I'm gonna add to both sides, a limit that I do know exists. And that's the limit of f of a. of f of a. Now, I do know that both of these two limits
on the left side exists, so I can use the limit rule about sums to rewrite this limit. Now, I do know that both of these two limits
on the left side exists, so I can use the limit rule about sums to rewrite this limit. Now, on the left side, I can cancel out my
copies of f of a, whatever number that is, and I get that the limit as x goes to a of
f of x which has to exist by the the limit rule for psalms that I applied Now, on the left side, I can cancel out my
copies of f of a, whatever number that is, and I get that the limit as x goes to a of
f of x which has to exist by the the limit rule for psalms that I applied above. above. That limit their past to equal the limit as
x goes to a of f of a, well, f of a is just some number, doesn't matter what X is doing
f of a is it's just f of a, whatever that is. So this limit on the right is just f of
a, and look at that. That's exactly what it means for a function to be continuous at x
equals a, the limit as x goes to a of f of x equals f of a. So f is continuous at x equals
a, hella proof is complete. In this video, we prove that if f is differentiable at x
equals a, then f is continuous at x equals a. This statement is equivalent to another
statement known in logic as its contrapositive, which says that if f is not continuous, at
x equals a, then f is not differentiable at x equals a. In this video, we'll learn a few
rules for calculating derivatives, namely, the power role, and the derivatives of sums,
differences and constant multiples. These rules will give us shortcuts for finding derivatives
quickly, without needing to resort to the old limit definition of derivative. In this
video, we'll only do statements of the rules and some examples, there won't be any proofs
or justification for why the rules hold. Instead, these proofs will be in a separate later video.
Let's start with some basics. First of all, if we have a constant C, and we will have
the function f of x equals C. So if I graph that, it's just going to be a straight horizontal
line. That limit their past to equal the limit as
x goes to a of f of a, well, f of a is just some number, doesn't matter what X is doing
f of a is it's just f of a, whatever that is. So this limit on the right is just f of
a, and look at that. That's exactly what it means for a function to be continuous at x
equals a, the limit as x goes to a of f of x equals f of a. So f is continuous at x equals
a, hella proof is complete. In this video, we prove that if f is differentiable at x
equals a, then f is continuous at x equals a. This statement is equivalent to another
statement known in logic as its contrapositive, which says that if f is not continuous, at
x equals a, then f is not differentiable at x equals a. In this video, we'll learn a few
rules for calculating derivatives, namely, the power role, and the derivatives of sums,
differences and constant multiples. These rules will give us shortcuts for finding derivatives
quickly, without needing to resort to the old limit definition of derivative. In this
video, we'll only do statements of the rules and some examples, there won't be any proofs
or justification for why the rules hold. Instead, these proofs will be in a separate later video.
Let's start with some basics. First of all, if we have a constant C, and we will have
the function f of x equals C. So if I graph that, it's just going to be a straight horizontal
line. So the derivative So the derivative df dx, ought to be zero, because the slope
of the tangent line of this straight line is just df dx, ought to be zero, because the slope
of the tangent line of this straight line is just zero. zero. Another simple example, is the derivative
of the function f of x equals x. So again, if I draw the graph, that's just going to
be a straight line with slope one. And so the tangent line for the straight line will
also have slope one. And the derivative, f prime of x has to be always equal to one.
These two simple examples are actually special cases of the power rule, which is one of the
most useful rules for calculating Another simple example, is the derivative
of the function f of x equals x. So again, if I draw the graph, that's just going to
be a straight line with slope one. And so the tangent line for the straight line will
also have slope one. And the derivative, f prime of x has to be always equal to one.
These two simple examples are actually special cases of the power rule, which is one of the
most useful rules for calculating derivatives. derivatives. So the power rule says that if you have the
function, y equals x to the n, where n is any real number, then you can find the derivative
d y dx, simply by pulling that exponent and down and multiplying it in the front and then
reducing the exponent by one. So for example, if you want to calculate the derivative of
y equals x to the 15th, D y dX here is just going to be 15 times x to the 15 minus one,
or 14. The second example, f of x equals the cube root of x might not immediately look
like an example where we can apply the power rule. But if we rewrite it, by putting the
cube root in exponential tation as x to the 1/3, now we can apply the power rule, we bring
the 1/3 down, multiplied on the front and So the power rule says that if you have the
function, y equals x to the n, where n is any real number, then you can find the derivative
d y dx, simply by pulling that exponent and down and multiplying it in the front and then
reducing the exponent by one. So for example, if you want to calculate the derivative of
y equals x to the 15th, D y dX here is just going to be 15 times x to the 15 minus one,
or 14. The second example, f of x equals the cube root of x might not immediately look
like an example where we can apply the power rule. But if we rewrite it, by putting the
cube root in exponential tation as x to the 1/3, now we can apply the power rule, we bring
the 1/3 down, multiplied on the front and reduce the reduce the exponent of 1/3 by one, or 1/3 minus one is
negative two thirds. So we found the derivative here using the power rule, we could rewrite
it if we want to using exponent rules, as one over 3x to the two thirds, either answers
good. exponent of 1/3 by one, or 1/3 minus one is
negative two thirds. So we found the derivative here using the power rule, we could rewrite
it if we want to using exponent rules, as one over 3x to the two thirds, either answers
good. In the third example, g of x is one over x
to the 3.7. Again, we need to do a little rewriting before we can apply the power rule.
So I'm going to rewrite g of x as x to the minus 3.7. Using exponent rules, now I can
find dg dx by pulling down the negative 3.7 multiplying in the front, and now I have to
reduce negative 3.7 by one, so I subtract one that gives me x to the negative 4.7. Again,
I can rewrite this if I wish as negative 3.7 over x to the 4.7. It's important to notice
that in all these examples and in fact, in any example where the power rule applies,
the variable x is in the base. And the exponent is just a constant, just a real number. The
constant multiple rules says that if c is just a constant real number, and f is a differentiable
function, then the derivative of C times f of x is just c times the derivative of f of
x. In other words, when we take the derivative, we can just pull a constant outside of the
derivative sign. Let's use this rule in an example. If we want to take the derivative
of 5x cubed, that's the same thing as five times the derivative of x cubed. And now using
the power rule, we can bring down the three and get 15x squared. f and g are differentiable
functions, then the derivative of f of x plus g of x is the derivative of f plus the derivative
of g. Similarly, for a difference, if f and g are differentiable functions, then the derivative
of the difference is just the difference of the derivatives. Now let's use all these rules
together to calculate the derivative of this polynomial. To find the y dx, we can use the
sum and difference rule to calculate the derivative of each term separately. Now using the constant
multiple rule and the power rule, we can bring out the seven, bring down the three getting
x squared here, similarly, for the next term, five times two times x to the one, four times
the derivative of x, which is just one, and the derivative of a constant two is just zero.
So simplifying, we get 21x squared minus 10x plus four, and notice that the derivative
of the original polynomial is just another polynomial of one less degree. In this video,
we use some shortcuts to calculate the derivatives of various functions, especially polynomials.
If you're interested in seeing where these rules come from, how they're derived from
the limit definition of derivative, then look for another video coming soon on proofs. This
video is about identities involving trig functions like sine and cosine. But I want to start
with some examples that just involve In the third example, g of x is one over x
to the 3.7. Again, we need to do a little rewriting before we can apply the power rule.
So I'm going to rewrite g of x as x to the minus 3.7. Using exponent rules, now I can
find dg dx by pulling down the negative 3.7 multiplying in the front, and now I have to
reduce negative 3.7 by one, so I subtract one that gives me x to the negative 4.7. Again,
I can rewrite this if I wish as negative 3.7 over x to the 4.7. It's important to notice
that in all these examples and in fact, in any example where the power rule applies,
the variable x is in the base. And the exponent is just a constant, just a real number. The
constant multiple rules says that if c is just a constant real number, and f is a differentiable
function, then the derivative of C times f of x is just c times the derivative of f of
x. In other words, when we take the derivative, we can just pull a constant outside of the
derivative sign. Let's use this rule in an example. If we want to take the derivative
of 5x cubed, that's the same thing as five times the derivative of x cubed. And now using
the power rule, we can bring down the three and get 15x squared. f and g are differentiable
functions, then the derivative of f of x plus g of x is the derivative of f plus the derivative
of g. Similarly, for a difference, if f and g are differentiable functions, then the derivative
of the difference is just the difference of the derivatives. Now let's use all these rules
together to calculate the derivative of this polynomial. To find the y dx, we can use the
sum and difference rule to calculate the derivative of each term separately. Now using the constant
multiple rule and the power rule, we can bring out the seven, bring down the three getting
x squared here, similarly, for the next term, five times two times x to the one, four times
the derivative of x, which is just one, and the derivative of a constant two is just zero.
So simplifying, we get 21x squared minus 10x plus four, and notice that the derivative
of the original polynomial is just another polynomial of one less degree. In this video,
we use some shortcuts to calculate the derivatives of various functions, especially polynomials.
If you're interested in seeing where these rules come from, how they're derived from
the limit definition of derivative, then look for another video coming soon on proofs. This
video is about identities involving trig functions like sine and cosine. But I want to start
with some examples that just involve quadratic functions. If I want to find the
solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus 6x minus seven equals zero,
factor it, x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors equal to 0x minus
seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero. And that gives me the solutions, x equals
seven, or x equals negative one. Next, let's look at this more complicated equation. I'm
going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side. Next, our combined
terms on the right hand side. So that gives me x squared minus 6x on both sides, well,
x squared minus 6x is equal to x squared minus 6x. That's true no matter what I plug in for
x, and therefore, all values of x satisfy this equation, we can say that the solution
set is all real numbers. The second equation is called an identity, because it holds for
all values of the variable. The first equation, on the other hand is not an identity, because
it only holds for some values of x and not all values. Please pause the video for a moment
and try to decide which of the following three equations or identities that is, which of
these equations hold for all values of the variable. To start out, you might want to
test them by plugging in a few values of the variable and see if the equation holds. The
first equation is not an identity. It does hold for some values of x. For example, if
x equals zero, then sine of two times zero is zero. Two times sine of zero is also zero.
So it does hold when x is zero. However, when x is say pi over two, then sine of two times
pi over two, that's the same thing as sine of pi, which is zero, but two times sine of
pi over two, that's two times one, or two, and zero is not equal to two. So the equation
does not hold for x equals pi quadratic functions. If I want to find the
solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus 6x minus seven equals zero,
factor it, x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors equal to 0x minus
seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero. And that gives me the solutions, x equals
seven, or x equals negative one. Next, let's look at this more complicated equation. I'm
going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side. Next, our combined
terms on the right hand side. So that gives me x squared minus 6x on both sides, well,
x squared minus 6x is equal to x squared minus 6x. That's true no matter what I plug in for
x, and therefore, all values of x satisfy this equation, we can say that the solution
set is all real numbers. The second equation is called an identity, because it holds for
all values of the variable. The first equation, on the other hand is not an identity, because
it only holds for some values of x and not all values. Please pause the video for a moment
and try to decide which of the following three equations or identities that is, which of
these equations hold for all values of the variable. To start out, you might want to
test them by plugging in a few values of the variable and see if the equation holds. The
first equation is not an identity. It does hold for some values of x. For example, if
x equals zero, then sine of two times zero is zero. Two times sine of zero is also zero.
So it does hold when x is zero. However, when x is say pi over two, then sine of two times
pi over two, that's the same thing as sine of pi, which is zero, but two times sine of
pi over two, that's two times one, or two, and zero is not equal to two. So the equation
does not hold for x equals pi over two. over two. Since it doesn't hold for all values of the
variable, it's not an identity. The second equation is an identity. You can build some
evidence for this by plugging in numbers. For example, cosine of zero plus pi, which
is negative one is the same thing as negative of cosine of zero. You can also check for
example, that cosine of pi over six plus pi is the same thing as negative cosine of pi
over six. But even if we check a zillion examples, that's just evidence, it's not a proof that
the identity holds, we could have just gotten lucky with the values we picked, we can build
a little bit stronger evidence, by looking at graphs, I'm going to put theta on the x
axis in a pie graph, y equals cosine of theta plus Since it doesn't hold for all values of the
variable, it's not an identity. The second equation is an identity. You can build some
evidence for this by plugging in numbers. For example, cosine of zero plus pi, which
is negative one is the same thing as negative of cosine of zero. You can also check for
example, that cosine of pi over six plus pi is the same thing as negative cosine of pi
over six. But even if we check a zillion examples, that's just evidence, it's not a proof that
the identity holds, we could have just gotten lucky with the values we picked, we can build
a little bit stronger evidence, by looking at graphs, I'm going to put theta on the x
axis in a pie graph, y equals cosine of theta plus pi, pi, that's just like the graph of cosine shifted
over to the left by pi. On the other hand, if I graph y equals negative cosine theta,
that's the graph of cosine theta, reflected across the x axis, which gives us the exact
same graph. So graphing both sides gives us strong evidence that this equation is an identity,
it holds for all values of theta. Now, the strongest evidence of all would be an algebraic
proof, which we'll do later in the course, once we have a formula for the cosine of a
sum of two angles. that's just like the graph of cosine shifted
over to the left by pi. On the other hand, if I graph y equals negative cosine theta,
that's the graph of cosine theta, reflected across the x axis, which gives us the exact
same graph. So graphing both sides gives us strong evidence that this equation is an identity,
it holds for all values of theta. Now, the strongest evidence of all would be an algebraic
proof, which we'll do later in the course, once we have a formula for the cosine of a
sum of two angles. In the meantime, let's look at equation C.
It turns out equation C is an identity. And we could build evidence for it again by plugging
in values for x, or by graphing the left side and the right side separately, and checking
to see that the graphs coincided. But for this example, I'm going to go ahead and do
an algebraic verification. In the meantime, let's look at equation C.
It turns out equation C is an identity. And we could build evidence for it again by plugging
in values for x, or by graphing the left side and the right side separately, and checking
to see that the graphs coincided. But for this example, I'm going to go ahead and do
an algebraic verification. In particular, I'm going to start with the
left side of the equation, and rewrite things and rewrite things until I get to the right
side of the equation. The first thing I'll rewrite In particular, I'm going to start with the
left side of the equation, and rewrite things and rewrite things until I get to the right
side of the equation. The first thing I'll rewrite is secant and tangent in terms of their constituent
functions, sine and cosine. Since secant of x is one over cosine x, and tangent of x is
sine x over cosine x, I can rewrite this expression as one over cosine x minus sine x times sine
x over cosine x. I can clean up those fractions and write this as one over cosine x minus
sine squared x over cosine x. Now, I noticed that I have two fractions with the same denominator.
So I can pull them together as one minus sine squared x over cosine x. Next, I'm going to
rewrite the numerator one minus sine squared x using the Pythagorean identity that says
that cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals one, and therefore, one minus sine
squared x is equal to cosine squared x just by subtracting sine squared x from both sides.
So I can replace my numerator, one minus sine squared x with cosine squared x. And canceling
one cosine from the top and from the bottom, that's the same thing as cosine of x, which
is the right hand side that I was trying to get to. So a combination of a bunch of algebra,
and the Pythagorean identity allows me to prove that this equation is true for all values
of x, is secant and tangent in terms of their constituent
functions, sine and cosine. Since secant of x is one over cosine x, and tangent of x is
sine x over cosine x, I can rewrite this expression as one over cosine x minus sine x times sine
x over cosine x. I can clean up those fractions and write this as one over cosine x minus
sine squared x over cosine x. Now, I noticed that I have two fractions with the same denominator.
So I can pull them together as one minus sine squared x over cosine x. Next, I'm going to
rewrite the numerator one minus sine squared x using the Pythagorean identity that says
that cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals one, and therefore, one minus sine
squared x is equal to cosine squared x just by subtracting sine squared x from both sides.
So I can replace my numerator, one minus sine squared x with cosine squared x. And canceling
one cosine from the top and from the bottom, that's the same thing as cosine of x, which
is the right hand side that I was trying to get to. So a combination of a bunch of algebra,
and the Pythagorean identity allows me to prove that this equation is true for all values
of x, it's an identity. The best way to prove that
an equation is an identity it's an identity. The best way to prove that
an equation is an identity is to use algebra and to use other identities,
like the Pythagorean identity to rewrite one side of the equation till it looks like the
other side. The best way to prove the net equation is not an identity is to plug in
numbers that break the identity. That is make the equation not true. Now if you're just
trying to decide if an equation has an identity or not, and not worried about proving it,
then I recommend plugging in numbers, or graphing the left and right sides to see if those graphs
are the same. Recall that an identity is an equation that holds for all values of the
variable. This video states and proves three identities called the Pythagorean identities.
The first one is the familiar cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one.
The second one says tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared theta. And the third
one goes cotangent squared theta plus one equals cosecant squared theta. Let's start
by proving that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. I'll do this
by drawing the unit circle with a right triangle inside it by the definition of sine and cosine,
the x&y coordinates of this top point, r cosine theta and sine theta, the high partners, my
triangle is one, since that's the radius of my unit circle. Now the length of the base
of my triangle is the same thing as the x coordinate of this point. So that's equal
to cosine theta. The height of this triangle is the same thing as the y coordinate of this
point. So that's sine theta. Now the Pythagoras theorem for right triangles, says this side
length squared plus that side length squared is equal to the hypothenar squared. So by
the Pythagorean theorem, we have that cosine theta squared plus sine theta squared equals
one squared, I can rewrite that as cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals
one, since one squared is one, and cosine squared theta is just a shorthand notation
for cosine theta squared. That completes the proof of the first Pythagorean identity, at
least in the case, when the angle theta is in the first quadrant. In the case, when the
angle was in a different quadrant, you can use symmetry to argue the same identity holds.
But I won't give the details here. To prove the next Pythagorean identity, tan squared
theta plus one equals secant squared theta, let's use the first without your an identity,
which said that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one, I'm going to
divide both sides of this equation by cosine squared theta. Now I'm going to rewrite the
left side by breaking apart the fraction into cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta
plus sine squared theta over cosine squared theta. Now cosine squared theta over cosine
squared theta is just one. And I can rewrite the next fraction as sine of theta over cosine
of theta squared. That's because when I square a fraction, I can just square the numerator
and square the denominator. And sine squared theta is shorthand for sine of theta squares.
Similarly, for cosine squared theta. Now on the other side of the equal sign, I can rewrite
this fraction as one over cosine theta squared. Again, that's because when I square the fraction,
I just get the one squared, which is one divided by the cosine theta squared, which is this.
I'm almost done. sine theta over cosine theta is the same thing as tangent theta. And one
over cosine theta is the same thing as secant theta. Using the shorthand notation, that
says one plus tan squared theta equals sequencer data, which, after rearranging is exactly
the identity that we were looking for. The proof of the third for that green identity
is very similar. Once again, I'll start with the identity is to use algebra and to use other identities,
like the Pythagorean identity to rewrite one side of the equation till it looks like the
other side. The best way to prove the net equation is not an identity is to plug in
numbers that break the identity. That is make the equation not true. Now if you're just
trying to decide if an equation has an identity or not, and not worried about proving it,
then I recommend plugging in numbers, or graphing the left and right sides to see if those graphs
are the same. Recall that an identity is an equation that holds for all values of the
variable. This video states and proves three identities called the Pythagorean identities.
The first one is the familiar cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one.
The second one says tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared theta. And the third
one goes cotangent squared theta plus one equals cosecant squared theta. Let's start
by proving that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. I'll do this
by drawing the unit circle with a right triangle inside it by the definition of sine and cosine,
the x&y coordinates of this top point, r cosine theta and sine theta, the high partners, my
triangle is one, since that's the radius of my unit circle. Now the length of the base
of my triangle is the same thing as the x coordinate of this point. So that's equal
to cosine theta. The height of this triangle is the same thing as the y coordinate of this
point. So that's sine theta. Now the Pythagoras theorem for right triangles, says this side
length squared plus that side length squared is equal to the hypothenar squared. So by
the Pythagorean theorem, we have that cosine theta squared plus sine theta squared equals
one squared, I can rewrite that as cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals
one, since one squared is one, and cosine squared theta is just a shorthand notation
for cosine theta squared. That completes the proof of the first Pythagorean identity, at
least in the case, when the angle theta is in the first quadrant. In the case, when the
angle was in a different quadrant, you can use symmetry to argue the same identity holds.
But I won't give the details here. To prove the next Pythagorean identity, tan squared
theta plus one equals secant squared theta, let's use the first without your an identity,
which said that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one, I'm going to
divide both sides of this equation by cosine squared theta. Now I'm going to rewrite the
left side by breaking apart the fraction into cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta
plus sine squared theta over cosine squared theta. Now cosine squared theta over cosine
squared theta is just one. And I can rewrite the next fraction as sine of theta over cosine
of theta squared. That's because when I square a fraction, I can just square the numerator
and square the denominator. And sine squared theta is shorthand for sine of theta squares.
Similarly, for cosine squared theta. Now on the other side of the equal sign, I can rewrite
this fraction as one over cosine theta squared. Again, that's because when I square the fraction,
I just get the one squared, which is one divided by the cosine theta squared, which is this.
I'm almost done. sine theta over cosine theta is the same thing as tangent theta. And one
over cosine theta is the same thing as secant theta. Using the shorthand notation, that
says one plus tan squared theta equals sequencer data, which, after rearranging is exactly
the identity that we were looking for. The proof of the third for that green identity
is very similar. Once again, I'll start with the identity cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta
equals one, and this time, I'll divide both sides by sine squared theta. I'll break up
the fraction on the left. And now I'll rewrite my fractions as cosine theta over sine theta
squared plus one equals one over sine theta squared. cosine over sine can be written As
cotangent, and one over sine can be written as cosecant. That gives me the identity that
I'm looking for. We've now proved three trig identities. The first one, we proved using
the unit circle, and the Pythagorean Theorem. The second and third identities, we proved
by using the first identity, and a bit of algebra. The sum and difference formulas are
formulas for computing the sine of a sum of two angles, the cosine of a sum of two angles,
the sine of a difference of two angles, and the cosine of a difference of two angles.
Please pause the video for a moment to think about this question. Is it true that the sine
of A plus B is equal to the sine of A plus the sine of B? No, it's not true. And we can
see by an example, if we plug in say, A equals pi over two and B equals pi, than the sine
of pi over two plus pi, is the same thing as a sine of three pi over two, which is negative
one. Whereas the sine of pi over two plus the sine of pi is equal to one plus zero,
which is one, negative one is not equal to one. So this equation does not hold for all
values of a and b. There are a few values of a and b for which it does hold. For example,
if a is zero, and B is zero, but it's not true in general, instead, we need more complicated
formulas. It turns out that the sine of the sum of two angles A plus B is given by sine
of A cosine of B plus cosine of A, sine of B. The cosine of A plus B is given by cosine
A cosine B minus sine A sine Bay. I like to remember these with a song, sine cosine cosine
sine cosine cosine minus sine sine. Please feel free to back up the video and sing along
with me, I encourage you to memorize the two formulas for the sine of a cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta
equals one, and this time, I'll divide both sides by sine squared theta. I'll break up
the fraction on the left. And now I'll rewrite my fractions as cosine theta over sine theta
squared plus one equals one over sine theta squared. cosine over sine can be written As
cotangent, and one over sine can be written as cosecant. That gives me the identity that
I'm looking for. We've now proved three trig identities. The first one, we proved using
the unit circle, and the Pythagorean Theorem. The second and third identities, we proved
by using the first identity, and a bit of algebra. The sum and difference formulas are
formulas for computing the sine of a sum of two angles, the cosine of a sum of two angles,
the sine of a difference of two angles, and the cosine of a difference of two angles.
Please pause the video for a moment to think about this question. Is it true that the sine
of A plus B is equal to the sine of A plus the sine of B? No, it's not true. And we can
see by an example, if we plug in say, A equals pi over two and B equals pi, than the sine
of pi over two plus pi, is the same thing as a sine of three pi over two, which is negative
one. Whereas the sine of pi over two plus the sine of pi is equal to one plus zero,
which is one, negative one is not equal to one. So this equation does not hold for all
values of a and b. There are a few values of a and b for which it does hold. For example,
if a is zero, and B is zero, but it's not true in general, instead, we need more complicated
formulas. It turns out that the sine of the sum of two angles A plus B is given by sine
of A cosine of B plus cosine of A, sine of B. The cosine of A plus B is given by cosine
A cosine B minus sine A sine Bay. I like to remember these with a song, sine cosine cosine
sine cosine cosine minus sine sine. Please feel free to back up the video and sing along
with me, I encourage you to memorize the two formulas for the sine of a sum of angles and the cosine of a sum of angles.
Once you do, it's easy to figure out the sine sum of angles and the cosine of a sum of angles.
Once you do, it's easy to figure out the sine and cosine of a difference of two angles.
One way to do this is to think of sine of and cosine of a difference of two angles.
One way to do this is to think of sine of A minus B as sine of A plus negative B. And
then use the angle sum formula. So this works out to sine cosine plus cosine, sine. And
now, if I use the fact that cosine is even, I know that cosine of negative B is cosine
of B. And since sine is odd, sine of negative b is negative sine of B. So I can rewrite
this as sine of A cosine of B minus cosine of A sine of B. Notice that this new formula
for the difference is the same as the formula for the sum is just that plus sign turned
into a minus sign. We can do the same trick for cosine of A minus B, that's cosine of
A plus minus b, which is cosine A cosine minus b minus sine of A sine of negative B. Again,
using even an odd properties, this gives us cosine A cosine B plus sine A sine B. Once
again, the formula for the difference is almost exactly like the for the song, just that minus
sign has switched to  a plus sign. Now let's use the angle sum formula
to find the exact value for the sign of 105 degrees. Now, 105 degrees is not a special
angle on the unit circle, but I can write it as the sum of two special angles. I can
write it as 60 degrees plus 45 degrees. Therefore, the sine of 105 degrees is the sine of 60
plus 45. And now by the angle some formula, this is sine, cosine, cosine, sine. And I
for my Unit Circle, I can figure out that sine of 60 degrees is root three over two
cosine of 45 degrees root two over two, cosine of 60 degrees is one half, and sine of 45
degrees is root two over two. So this simplifies to root six plus root two over four. For our
last example, let's find the cosine of v plus W, given the values of cosine v and cosine
W, and the fact that v and w are angles in the first quadrant. Remember, to compute the
cosine of a sum, we can't just add together the two cosines. That wouldn't even make sense
in this case, because adding point nine and point seven would give something bigger than
one and the cosine of something's never bigger than one. Instead, we have to use the angle
sum formula for cosine. So that goes cosine of v plus w equals cosine, cosine, minus sine,
sine. Now, I've already know the cosine of v and the cosine of W, so I could just plug
those in. But I have to figure out the sine of v and the sine of W from the given information.
And one way to do that is to draw right triangles. So here, I'm going to draw a right triangle
with angle V, A minus B as sine of A plus negative B. And
then use the angle sum formula. So this works out to sine cosine plus cosine, sine. And
now, if I use the fact that cosine is even, I know that cosine of negative B is cosine
of B. And since sine is odd, sine of negative b is negative sine of B. So I can rewrite
this as sine of A cosine of B minus cosine of A sine of B. Notice that this new formula
for the difference is the same as the formula for the sum is just that plus sign turned
into a minus sign. We can do the same trick for cosine of A minus B, that's cosine of
A plus minus b, which is cosine A cosine minus b minus sine of A sine of negative B. Again,
using even an odd properties, this gives us cosine A cosine B plus sine A sine B. Once
again, the formula for the difference is almost exactly like the for the song, just that minus
sign has switched to a plus sign. Now let's use the angle sum formula to find the exact
value for the sign of 105 degrees. Now, 105 degrees is not a special angle on the unit
circle, but I can write it as the sum of two special angles. I can write it as 60 degrees
plus 45 degrees. Therefore, the sine of 105 degrees is the sine of 60 plus 45. And now
by the angle some formula, this is sine, cosine, cosine, sine. And I for my Unit Circle, I
can figure out that sine of 60 degrees is root three over two cosine of 45 degrees root
two over two, cosine of 60 degrees is one half, and sine of 45 degrees is root two over
two. So this simplifies to root six plus root two over four. For our last example, let's
find the cosine of v plus W, given the values of cosine v and cosine W, and the fact that
v and w are angles in the first quadrant. Remember, to compute the cosine of a sum,
we can't just add together the two cosines. That wouldn't even make sense in this case,
because adding point nine and point seven would give something bigger than one and the
cosine of something's never bigger than one. Instead, we have to use the angle sum formula
for cosine. So that goes cosine of v plus w equals cosine, cosine, minus sine, sine.
Now, I've already know the cosine of v and the cosine of W, so I could just plug those
in. But I have to figure out the sine of v and the sine of W from the given information.
And one way to do that is to draw right triangles. So here, I'm going to draw a right triangle
with angle V, and another right triangle with angle W. Since
I know that the cosine of V is point nine, I can think of that as nine over 10. and another right triangle with angle W. Since
I know that the cosine of V is point nine, I can think of that as nine over 10. And I can think of that as adjacent over hypotenuse
in my right triangle. So I'll decorate my triangles adjacent side with the number nine
and the hypotenuse with 10. Similarly, since I know that the cosine of W is point seven,
which is seven tenths, I can put a seven on this adjacent side, and a 10 on this iPod
news. Now, the Pythagorean Theorem, lets me compute the length of the unlabeled side.
So this one is going to be the square root of 10 squared minus nine squared, that's going
to be the square root of 19. And here I have the square root of 10 squared minus seven
squared. So that's the square root of 51. I can now find the sign of V as the opposite
over the hi partners. So that's the square root of 19 over 10. And the sign of W will
be the square root of 51 over 10. Because we're assuming v and w are in the first quadrant,
we know the values of sign need to be positive, so we don't need to Jimmy around with positive
or negative signs in our answers, we can just leave them as is. And I can think of that as adjacent over hypotenuse
in my right triangle. So I'll decorate my triangles adjacent side with the number nine
and the hypotenuse with 10. Similarly, since I know that the cosine of W is point seven,
which is seven tenths, I can put a seven on this adjacent side, and a 10 on this iPod
news. Now, the Pythagorean Theorem, lets me compute the length of the unlabeled side.
So this one is going to be the square root of 10 squared minus nine squared, that's going
to be the square root of 19. And here I have the square root of 10 squared minus seven
squared. So that's the square root of 51. I can now find the sign of V as the opposite
over the hi partners. So that's the square root of 19 over 10. And the sign of W will
be the square root of 51 over 10. Because we're assuming v and w are in the first quadrant,
we know the values of sign need to be positive, so we don't need to Jimmy around with positive
or negative signs in our answers, we can just leave them as is. Now we're ready to plug into our formula.
So we have that cosine of v plus w is equal to point nine times point seven minus the
square root of 19 over 10, times the square root of 51 over 10. Now we're ready to plug into our formula.
So we have that cosine of v plus w is equal to point nine times point seven minus the
square root of 19 over 10, times the square root of 51 over 10. using a calculator, this works out to a decimal
approximation of 0.3187. This video gave the angle sum and difference formulas and use
them to compute some values. To see a proof for why the sum formulas hold, please watch
my other video. This video gives formulas for sine of two theta and cosine of two theta.
Please pause the video for a moment and see if you think this equation sine of two theta
equals two sine theta is true or false. Remember that true means always true for all values
of theta were false means sometimes they're always false. This equation is false, because
it's not true for all values of theta. One way to see this is graphically, if I graph
y equals sine of two theta, that's like the graph of sine theta, squished in horizontally
by a factor of one half. On the other hand, if I graph y equals two sine beta, that's
like the graph of sine theta stretched vertically by a factor of two. These two graphs are not
the same. So instead, we need a more complicated formula for sine of two theta. And that formula
is sine of two theta is two sine theta, cosine theta. It's not hard to see why that formula
works based on the angle some formula. Recall that sine of A plus B is equal to sine A cosine
B plus cosine A sign Therefore, sine of two theta, which is sine of theta plus theta is
going to be sine theta, cosine theta, plus cosine theta sine theta. simply plugging in
theta for a and theta for B, in this angle, some formula, will sine theta cosine theta
is the same thing as cosine theta sine theta. So I can rewrite this as twice sine theta
cosine theta. That gives me this formula. There's also a formula for cosine of two theta.
And that formula is cosine squared theta minus sine squared theta. Again, we can use the
angle sum formula to see where this comes from. cosine of A plus B is equal to cosine
of A cosine of B minus sine A, sine B. So if we want cosine of two theta, that's just
cosine of theta plus theta, which is cosine theta, cosine theta, minus sine theta, sine
theta by plugging in beta for a and b, this can be rewritten as cosine squared theta minus
sine squared theta, which is exactly the formula above. Now there are a couple other formulas
for cosine of two theta that are also popular. One of them is one minus two sine squared
theta. And the other one is cosine of two theta is two cosine squared theta minus one,
you can get each of these two formulas from the original one using the Pythagorean identity.
We know that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta is one. So cosine squared theta
is one minus sine squared theta. If I plug that into my original formula, which I've
copied here, so I'm plugging in, instead of cosine squared, I'm gonna write one minus
sine squared theta, I still have a nother minus sine squared theta. So that's the same
thing as one minus twice science grid data, which is exactly what I'm looking for. Similarly,
I can use the Pythagorean identity to write sine squared theta as one minus cosine squared
theta. Again, I'll take this equation and copy it below. But this time, I'm going to
plug in for sine squared right here. So that gives me cosine of two theta is cosine squared
theta minus the quantity one minus cosine squared theta. That simplifies to two cosine
squared theta minus one after distributing the negative sign and combining like terms. using a calculator, this works out to a decimal
approximation of 0.3187. This video gave the angle sum and difference formulas and use
them to compute some values. To see a proof for why the sum formulas hold, please watch
my other video. This video gives formulas for sine of two theta and cosine of two theta.
Please pause the video for a moment and see if you think this equation sine of two theta
equals two sine theta is true or false. Remember that true means always true for all values
of theta were false means sometimes they're always false. This equation is false, because
it's not true for all values of theta. One way to see this is graphically, if I graph
y equals sine of two theta, that's like the graph of sine theta, squished in horizontally
by a factor of one half. On the other hand, if I graph y equals two sine beta, that's
like the graph of sine theta stretched vertically by a factor of two. These two graphs are not
the same. So instead, we need a more complicated formula for sine of two theta. And that formula
is sine of two theta is two sine theta, cosine theta. It's not hard to see why that formula
works based on the angle some formula. Recall that sine of A plus B is equal to sine A cosine
B plus cosine A sign Therefore, sine of two theta, which is sine of theta plus theta is
going to be sine theta, cosine theta, plus cosine theta sine theta. simply plugging in
theta for a and theta for B, in this angle, some formula, will sine theta cosine theta
is the same thing as cosine theta sine theta. So I can rewrite this as twice sine theta
cosine theta. That gives me this formula. There's also a formula for cosine of two theta.
And that formula is cosine squared theta minus sine squared theta. Again, we can use the
angle sum formula to see where this comes from. cosine of A plus B is equal to cosine
of A cosine of B minus sine A, sine B. So if we want cosine of two theta, that's just
cosine of theta plus theta, which is cosine theta, cosine theta, minus sine theta, sine
theta by plugging in beta for a and b, this can be rewritten as cosine squared theta minus
sine squared theta, which is exactly the formula above. Now there are a couple other formulas
for cosine of two theta that are also popular. One of them is one minus two sine squared
theta. And the other one is cosine of two theta is two cosine squared theta minus one,
you can get each of these two formulas from the original one using the Pythagorean identity.
We know that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta is one. So cosine squared theta
is one minus sine squared theta. If I plug that into my original formula, which I've
copied here, so I'm plugging in, instead of cosine squared, I'm gonna write one minus
sine squared theta, I still have a nother minus sine squared theta. So that's the same
thing as one minus twice science grid data, which is exactly what I'm looking for. Similarly,
I can use the Pythagorean identity to write sine squared theta as one minus cosine squared
theta. Again, I'll take this equation and copy it below. But this time, I'm going to
plug in for sine squared right here. So that gives me cosine of two theta is cosine squared
theta minus the quantity one minus cosine squared theta. That simplifies to two cosine
squared theta minus one after distributing the negative sign and combining like terms. So I have one double angle formula for sine
of two theta. And I have three versions of the double angle formula for cosine of two
theta. So I have one double angle formula for sine
of two theta. And I have three versions of the double angle formula for cosine of two
theta. Now let's use these formulas in some examples.
Let's find the cosine of two theta. If we know that cosine theta is negative one over
root 10, and theta terminates in quadrant three, we have a choice of three formulas
for cosine of two theta, I'm going to choose the second one, because it only involves cosine
if they had on the right side. And they already know my value for cosine theta. Of course,
I could use one of the other ones, Now let's use these formulas in some examples.
Let's find the cosine of two theta. If we know that cosine theta is negative one over
root 10, and theta terminates in quadrant three, we have a choice of three formulas
for cosine of two theta, I'm going to choose the second one, because it only involves cosine
if they had on the right side. And they already know my value for cosine theta. Of course,
I could use one of the other ones, but then I'd have to work out the value of
sine theta. So plugging in, I get cosine of two theta is twice negative one over root
n squared minus one, which simplifies to two tenths minus one or negative eight tenths,
negative four fifths. Finally, let's solve the equation two cosine x plus sine of 2x
equals zero. What makes this equation tricky is that one of the trig functions has the
argument of just x, but the other tree function has the argument of 2x. So I want to use my
double angle formula to rewrite sine of 2x. I'll copy down the two cosine x, and now sine
of 2x is equal to two sine x cosine x. At this point, I see a way to factor my equation,
I can factor out a two cosine x from both of these two terms. That gives me one plus
sine x and the product there is equal to zero. That means that either two cosine x is equal
to zero One plus sine x is equal to zero, that simplifies to cosine x equals zero, or
sine x is negative one. Using my unit circle, I see that cosine of x is zero at pi over
two, and three pi over two, while sine of x is negative one at three pi over two, there's
some redundancy here, but my solution set is going to be pi over two plus multiples
of two pi, and three pi over two plus multiples of two pi. This video proved the double angle
formulas, sine of two theta is two sine theta cosine theta. and cosine of two theta is cosine
squared theta minus sine squared theta. It also proved to alternate versions of the equation
for cosine of two theta. This video introduces higher order derivatives and notation. We've
seen that f prime of x denotes the derivative of the function f of x, but f prime of x is
also itself a function. So we can take its derivative, that would be f prime prime of
x, which is usually written instead as f double prime of x. This is called the second derivative
of f. And it means the derivative of the derivative, we can also talk about the third derivative,
f triple prime of x, which might sometimes be written f to the three of x if you get
tired of writing all those primes, and we can talk about the nth derivative f, parentheses
n of x, the parentheses here are important to show that it's the nth derivative. The
second, third and nth derivative are referred to as higher order but then I'd have to work out the value of
sine theta. So plugging in, I get cosine of two theta is twice negative one over root
n squared minus one, which simplifies to two tenths minus one or negative eight tenths,
negative four fifths. Finally, let's solve the equation two cosine x plus sine of 2x
equals zero. What makes this equation tricky is that one of the trig functions has the
argument of just x, but the other tree function has the argument of 2x. So I want to use my
double angle formula to rewrite sine of 2x. I'll copy down the two cosine x, and now sine
of 2x is equal to two sine x cosine x. At this point, I see a way to factor my equation,
I can factor out a two cosine x from both of these two terms. That gives me one plus
sine x and the product there is equal to zero. That means that either two cosine x is equal
to zero One plus sine x is equal to zero, that simplifies to cosine x equals zero, or
sine x is negative one. Using my unit circle, I see that cosine of x is zero at pi over
two, and three pi over two, while sine of x is negative one at three pi over two, there's
some redundancy here, but my solution set is going to be pi over two plus multiples
of two pi, and three pi over two plus multiples of two pi. This video proved the double angle
formulas, sine of two theta is two sine theta cosine theta. and cosine of two theta is cosine
squared theta minus sine squared theta. It also proved to alternate versions of the equation
for cosine of two theta. This video introduces higher order derivatives and notation. We've
seen that f prime of x denotes the derivative of the function f of x, but f prime of x is
also itself a function. So we can take its derivative, that would be f prime prime of
x, which is usually written instead as f double prime of x. This is called the second derivative
of f. And it means the derivative of the derivative, we can also talk about the third derivative,
f triple prime of x, which might sometimes be written f to the three of x if you get
tired of writing all those primes, and we can talk about the nth derivative f, parentheses
n of x, the parentheses here are important to show that it's the nth derivative. The
second, third and nth derivative are referred to as higher order derivatives. derivatives. There are many alternative notations for derivatives
stemming from their tangled and contentious history in the 1600s. There are a few different
notations for functions themselves. Most often we write a function of something like f of
x, but we can also use the variable y to refer to the output of a function. When we're looking
at the first derivative. We've been using the notation f prime of x. But you might also
see y prime, this means the same thing. Another notation is df dx, is known as lug nuts denotation.
After five minutes, you might see something like dy dx of f of x. And you might see dy
dx, another version of Lebanon's notation. Sometimes you'll also see a capital D used
to refer to the derivative. If we're looking at the second derivative, we've seen that
in Haitian f double prime of x, y double prime is a similar notation, or we might write dy
dx of df There are many alternative notations for derivatives
stemming from their tangled and contentious history in the 1600s. There are a few different
notations for functions themselves. Most often we write a function of something like f of
x, but we can also use the variable y to refer to the output of a function. When we're looking
at the first derivative. We've been using the notation f prime of x. But you might also
see y prime, this means the same thing. Another notation is df dx, is known as lug nuts denotation.
After five minutes, you might see something like dy dx of f of x. And you might see dy
dx, another version of Lebanon's notation. Sometimes you'll also see a capital D used
to refer to the derivative. If we're looking at the second derivative, we've seen that
in Haitian f double prime of x, y double prime is a similar notation, or we might write dy
dx of df dx. dx. And the shorthand for that is d squared f
dx squared. Similarly, we might write d squared y dx squared using y in the place of F for
the function. And the shorthand for that is d squared f
dx squared. Similarly, we might write d squared y dx squared using y in the place of F for
the function. There's similar notations for third derivative,
I'll jump ahead to nth derivatives. So that would be F to the n of x, or y to the n, d
to the n of f dx to the n, or D to the n of y dx to the N. When using live minutes notation,
we want to emphasize that we're evaluating our derivative at a particular value of x,
we might write something like at x equals three, or at x equals a, using a vertical
line. For better or for worse, you'll need to become familiar with all of these alternative
notations. There's similar notations for third derivative,
I'll jump ahead to nth derivatives. So that would be F to the n of x, or y to the n, d
to the n of f dx to the n, or D to the n of y dx to the N. When using live minutes notation,
we want to emphasize that we're evaluating our derivative at a particular value of x,
we might write something like at x equals three, or at x equals a, using a vertical
line. For better or for worse, you'll need to become familiar with all of these alternative
notations. That's all for this video on higher order
derivatives and notation. This video is about the derivative of e to the x, one of my favorite
functions ever simply because it has such a great derivative. As you may recall, he
is an irrational number whose decimal approximation is something like 2.718 looks like it's repeating.
But then it keeps going on forever, never repeating never terminating. That's all for this video on higher order
derivatives and notation. This video is about the derivative of e to the x, one of my favorite
functions ever simply because it has such a great derivative. As you may recall, he
is an irrational number whose decimal approximation is something like 2.718 looks like it's repeating.
But then it keeps going on forever, never repeating never terminating. Its value notice is somewhere in between two
and three. Here is a graph of y equals e to the x. Its value notice is somewhere in between two
and three. Here is a graph of y equals e to the x. It says exponential function increase thing
looks a lot like two to the x or three to the x, not only is the graph of e to the x
increasing, but it's increasing more and more rapidly. So for negative values of x, the
slope of this graph is positive but very close to zero. Over here, when x equals zero, that
slope is looks like approximately a slope of one, we'll see that it is in fact exactly
one. And as the x values increase, this tangent lines get steeper and steeper. I'm going to
state without proof, three really useful facts about E. First, if you take the limit, as
n goes to infinity of one plus one over N raised to the nth power, that limit exists
and equals E, you might have seen something like that when you took precalculus, and looked
at compound interest compounded over smaller and smaller time periods. But even if you
haven't seen it before, it's a really important fact worth memorizing, you'll see it again
later in the class. A second important formula is that the limit as h goes to zero of e to
the H minus one over h equals one. Now this expression here on the left may remind you
of a derivative, in fact, I can rewrite it as the limit as h goes to zero of e to the
zero plus h minus e to the zero since either the zero is one over h, that's equal to one.
And this expression right here on the left is just the derivative of e to the x at x
equals zero, according to the limit definition of derivative. So this fact, is really saying
that the derivative of e to the x at x equals zero, that derivative is equal to one. So
for the third fat, It says exponential function increase thing
looks a lot like two to the x or three to the x, not only is the graph of e to the x
increasing, but it's increasing more and more rapidly. So for negative values of x, the
slope of this graph is positive but very close to zero. Over here, when x equals zero, that
slope is looks like approximately a slope of one, we'll see that it is in fact exactly
one. And as the x values increase, this tangent lines get steeper and steeper. I'm going to
state without proof, three really useful facts about E. First, if you take the limit, as
n goes to infinity of one plus one over N raised to the nth power, that limit exists
and equals E, you might have seen something like that when you took precalculus, and looked
at compound interest compounded over smaller and smaller time periods. But even if you
haven't seen it before, it's a really important fact worth memorizing, you'll see it again
later in the class. A second important formula is that the limit as h goes to zero of e to
the H minus one over h equals one. Now this expression here on the left may remind you
of a derivative, in fact, I can rewrite it as the limit as h goes to zero of e to the
zero plus h minus e to the zero since either the zero is one over h, that's equal to one.
And this expression right here on the left is just the derivative of e to the x at x
equals zero, according to the limit definition of derivative. So this fact, is really saying
that the derivative of e to the x at x equals zero, that derivative is equal to one. So
for the third fat, the third fact, the third fact, it talks about the derivative of e to the
x in general. And that third fact is that the derivative of the function, either the
X is the function, e to the x, e to the x is its own derivative. So this is a generalized
version of the second fact. Because the second fact is saying that the derivative at x equals
zero is one, well, one is just the same thing as e to the zero. So it saying the drought
of either the exit at x equals zero is equal to zero. And in general, the derivative of
e to the x at any x is just e to the x. Now, fact, one is frequently taken as the definition
of E. Sometimes fact two instead is taken as a definition of he, since he is the unique
number with this, this property, the unique number, you can plug in here and get this
limit equal one, it's possible to prove that fact one implies fact two and vice versa.
But I won't do that here. It's also possible to prove that fact two implies fact three
about the derivative in general. And that's pretty straightforward from the definition
of derivative. So I will show you that argument. So let's start out assuming fact to and try
to prove fact three using the definition of direct by the definition of derivative. The
derivative of e to the x is the limit as h goes to zero of e to the x plus h minus e
to the x over h. If I factor out an E to the X, from both terms on the numerator, I get
the limit of e to the x times e to the H minus one over h. Notice that e to the x times e
to the H is in the x plus h by the exponent rules. Now, either the X has nothing to do
with H, so it's just a constant as far as H is concerned. And I can pull it all the
way out of the limit sign and rewrite this limit. Now by factor two, which I'm assuming
this limit here is just one, which means that my derivative it talks about the derivative of e to the
x in general. And that third fact is that the derivative of the function, either the
X is the function, e to the x, e to the x is its own derivative. So this is a generalized
version of the second fact. Because the second fact is saying that the derivative at x equals
zero is one, well, one is just the same thing as e to the zero. So it saying the drought
of either the exit at x equals zero is equal to zero. And in general, the derivative of
e to the x at any x is just e to the x. Now, fact, one is frequently taken as the definition
of E. Sometimes fact two instead is taken as a definition of he, since he is the unique
number with this, this property, the unique number, you can plug in here and get this
limit equal one, it's possible to prove that fact one implies fact two and vice versa.
But I won't do that here. It's also possible to prove that fact two implies fact three
about the derivative in general. And that's pretty straightforward from the definition
of derivative. So I will show you that argument. So let's start out assuming fact to and try
to prove fact three using the definition of direct by the definition of derivative. The
derivative of e to the x is the limit as h goes to zero of e to the x plus h minus e
to the x over h. If I factor out an E to the X, from both terms on the numerator, I get
the limit of e to the x times e to the H minus one over h. Notice that e to the x times e
to the H is in the x plus h by the exponent rules. Now, either the X has nothing to do
with H, so it's just a constant as far as H is concerned. And I can pull it all the
way out of the limit sign and rewrite this limit. Now by factor two, which I'm assuming
this limit here is just one, which means that my derivative is e to the x, just like I wanted to show.
Here's a slightly tricky example, asking you to compute the derivative of a function that
involves lots of ears and X's is e to the x, just like I wanted to show.
Here's a slightly tricky example, asking you to compute the derivative of a function that
involves lots of ears and X's combined in lots of different ways. You'll
need to use not only the rule for the derivative of e to the x that we just talked about, but
also the power rule and other rules. derivatives that we've talked about combined in lots of different ways. You'll
need to use not only the rule for the derivative of e to the x that we just talked about, but
also the power rule and other rules. derivatives that we've talked about earlier. earlier. So please pause the video and try to compute
this derivative yourself paying careful attention to what's a variable and what's the constant. So please pause the video and try to compute
this derivative yourself paying careful attention to what's a variable and what's the constant. Okay, so we're taking the derivative here
with respect to x, that's our variable. And I'm taking the derivative of this entire expression,
which I can split up as a sum of derivatives. For the first term, I can just use the power
rule, E is a constant coefficient, so I just need to take down the exponent of two multiplied
on the front, times x to the One Power. Now for the second part, Okay, so we're taking the derivative here
with respect to x, that's our variable. And I'm taking the derivative of this entire expression,
which I can split up as a sum of derivatives. For the first term, I can just use the power
rule, E is a constant coefficient, so I just need to take down the exponent of two multiplied
on the front, times x to the One Power. Now for the second part, here, I do have my either the x function multiplied
by two, so its derivative is just two times the derivative of e to the x, which is either
the X here, I do have my either the x function multiplied
by two, so its derivative is just two times the derivative of e to the x, which is either
the X for my third part, I have just x times a constant
e squared. So the derivative of x is one times that constant. And so I just get e squared.
Finally, to take the derivative of x to the power of E squared, I can use the power rule
because my variable is in the base, and I have a constant e squared in my exponent.
So using the power rule, I bring down the E squared times that by x and subtract one
from the exponent. This video states the happy fact that the derivative of e to the x is
just e to for my third part, I have just x times a constant
e squared. So the derivative of x is one times that constant. And so I just get e squared.
Finally, to take the derivative of x to the power of E squared, I can use the power rule
because my variable is in the base, and I have a constant e squared in my exponent.
So using the power rule, I bring down the E squared times that by x and subtract one
from the exponent. This video states the happy fact that the derivative of e to the x is
just e to the x. This video prove some of the rules
for taking derivatives. the x. This video prove some of the rules
for taking derivatives. First, the constant row, it makes sense that
the derivative of a constant real number has to be zero, because the slope of a horizontal
line First, the constant row, it makes sense that
the derivative of a constant real number has to be zero, because the slope of a horizontal
line is zero. is zero. But we can also prove this fact, using the
limit definition of derivative. The derivative of any function is the limit as h goes to
zero of the function of x plus h minus the function at x divided by H. Well, here, our
function is just a constant. So we're taking the limit as h goes to zero of the constant
minus the constant divided by h, which is just the limit as h goes to zero of zero over
h, which is just the limit of zero, which is zero. Intuitively, it also makes sense
that the derivative of the function y equals x is got to be one, because the graph of y
equals x is a straight line with slope one. But again, we can prove this using the limit
definition of derivative. So the derivative of x is the limit as h goes to zero of x plus
h minus x over h. Well, that simplifies to the limit of h over h, since the Xs can't
So in other words, the limit as h goes to zero of one, which is one as wanted But we can also prove this fact, using the
limit definition of derivative. The derivative of any function is the limit as h goes to
zero of  the function of x plus h minus the function
at x divided by H. Well, here, our function is just a constant. So we're taking the limit
as h goes to zero of the constant minus the constant divided by h, which is just the limit
as h goes to zero of zero over h, which is just the limit of zero, which is zero. Intuitively,
it also makes sense that the derivative of the function y equals x is got to be one,
because the graph of y equals x is a straight line with slope one. But again, we can prove
this using the limit definition of derivative. So the derivative of x is the limit as h goes
to zero of x plus h minus x over h. Well, that simplifies to the limit of h over h,
since the Xs can't So in other words, the limit as h goes to zero of one, which is one
as wanted x, x, h to the n minus one, and then finally, a
term of h to the N. That's the binomial expansion of x plus h to the n. Now, we still have to
subtract the x to the n that we had up here, and we still have to divide this whole thing
by H. Okay, that's looking kind of horribly complicated. h to the n minus one, and then finally, a
term of h to the N. That's the binomial expansion of x plus h to the n. Now, we still have to
subtract the x to the n that we had up here, and we still have to divide this whole thing
by H. Okay, that's looking kind of horribly complicated. But But notice that the X to the ends can So notice
that all of the remaining terms have an H in them. So if we factor out that H, we get
an x to the n minus one, plus a bunch of other terms. And canceling the H's, notice that the X to the ends can So notice
that all of the remaining terms have an H in them. So if we factor out that H, we get
an x to the n minus one, plus a bunch of other terms. And canceling the H's, we get we get one term that doesn't have any ages in it,
and another bunch of terms that all have H's in them, as h goes to zero, all these other
terms drop out because they go to zero. And what we're left with is simply n times x to
the n minus one, which is exactly what we want for the power role. I think that's a
pretty good proof if you're comfortable with the binomial formula. But if you haven't seen
the binomial formula before, that might leave you feeling a little cold. So I'm going to
offer you another proof using the other form of the limit definition of derivative. So
let me clear some space here. And I'll start over using this definition, f prime at a is
the limit as x goes to a of our function evaluated at x. So that's x to the n minus our function
evaluated at a, that's a to the n over x minus a. Again, I'm going to need to rewrite things
in order to evaluate this limit, since it's currently in a zero over zero and determinant
form. So I'm going to rewrite the top by factoring out a copy of x minus a, which gives me x
to the n minus one plus x to the n minus two A plus x to the n minus three A squared, you
see the pattern here. And I keep going until I get to x a to the n minus two and finally
a to the n minus one, that's still over x minus a, you can verify this factoring formula,
simply by multiplying out and checking that you In fact, do get x to the n minus a to
the n, after all your intermediate terms cancel. Now that I've factored, I can cancel my x
minus a, and simply evaluate my limit by plugging in x equal to A to get a to the n minus one
plus a to the n minus two A plus, and so on each of these terms is equal to a to the n
minus one. And there are a total of n terms, since we got them from the terms above that
started with x to the n minus one and did with x to the zero. So that's n terms. So
that means we've got a final sum of n times a to the n minus one for a derivative f prime
of A, which is exactly what we wanted to show. Next, I'll prove the constant multiple rule
that says that if c is a real number constant, and f is a differentiable function, then the
derivative of a constant times f is just the constant times the derivative of f. Starting
with the limit definition of derivative, I have that the derivative of C times f of x
is the limit as h goes to zero of C times f of x plus h minus c times f of x over h.
Now if I factor out the constant C, from both of these terms, and actually I can pull it
all the way out of the limit side, since the constant has nothing to do with h. So now
I get that was equal to the constant times the limit as h goes to zero of f of x plus
h minus f of x over h, which is just a constant times the derivative of f, which is what we
wanted to prove. one term that doesn't have any ages in it,
and another bunch of terms that all have H's in them, as h goes to zero, all these other
terms drop out because they go to zero. And what we're left with is simply n times x to
the n minus one, which is exactly what we want for the power role. I think that's a
pretty good proof if you're comfortable with the binomial formula. But if you haven't seen
the binomial formula before, that might leave you feeling a little cold. So I'm going to
offer you another proof using the other form of the limit definition of derivative. So
let me clear some space here. And I'll start over using this definition, f prime at a is
the limit as x goes to a of our function evaluated at x. So that's x to the n minus our function
evaluated at a, that's a to the n over x minus a. Again, I'm going to need to rewrite things
in order to evaluate this limit, since it's currently in a zero over zero and determinant
form. So I'm going to rewrite the top by factoring out a copy of x minus a, which gives me x
to the n minus one plus x to the n minus two A plus x to the n minus three A squared, you
see the pattern here. And I keep going until I get to x a to the n minus two and finally
a to the n minus one, that's still over x minus a, you can verify this factoring formula,
simply by multiplying out and checking that you In fact, do get x to the n minus a to
the n, after all your intermediate terms cancel. Now that I've factored, I can cancel my x
minus a, and simply evaluate my limit by plugging in x equal to A to get a to the n minus one
plus a to the n minus two A plus, and so on each of these terms is equal to a to the n
minus one. And there are a total of n terms, since we got them from the terms above that
started with x to the n minus one and did with x to the zero. So that's n terms. So
that means we've got a final sum of n times a to the n minus one for a derivative f prime
of A, which is exactly what we wanted to show. Next, I'll prove the constant multiple rule
that says that if c is a real number constant, and f is a differentiable function, then the
derivative of a constant times f is just the constant times the derivative of f. Starting
with the limit definition of derivative, I have that the derivative of C times f of x
is the limit as h goes to zero of C times f of x plus h minus c times f of x over h.
Now if I factor out the constant C, from both of these terms, and actually I can pull it
all the way out of the limit side, since the constant has nothing to do with h. So now
I get that was equal to the constant times the limit as h goes to zero of f of x plus
h minus f of x over h, which is just a constant times the derivative of f, which is what we
wanted to prove. The difference rule can be proved just like
the sum rule by writing out the definition of derivative and regrouping terms. Or we
could use kind of a sneaky shortcut, and put together two of our previous roles. So if
we think of f of x minus g of x as being f of x plus minus one times g of x, then we
can use the sum rule to rewrite this as a sum of derivatives, and then use the constant
multiplier rule to pull the constant of negative one out, and then we have exactly what we
wanted to prove. So in this video, we gave the proof of the content multiple rule, the
summon difference rules, and a proof of the power rule when n is a positive integer. This
video gives rules for calculating derivatives of functions that are products, or quotients
of other functions. In this video, you'll find statements of the product rule and the
quotient rule, and some examples. But no proofs, proofs are in a separate video. Before we
start, let's recall the Psalm and the difference rules. If f and g are differentiable functions,
then the derivative of the psalm f of x plus g of x is just the sum of the derivatives.
And a similar statement holds for differences. The derivative of the difference is the difference
of the derivatives. So does the same sort of rule hold for products of functions, in
other words, is the derivative of the product equal to the product of the derivatives? Let's
look at a simple example. To find out. For example, if f of x is x, and g of x is x squared,
then if we take the derivative of the product, x times x squared, well, that's just the derivative
of x cubed. We know how to do that with the power rule. So it's 3x squared. On the other
hand, if we look at the product of the derivatives, we get one times 2x or just 2x. And these
two things are not equal. So unfortunately, the answer is no such a simple product rule
does not hold. But not lose hope. There is a product rule, it's just a little more complicated
than the sum and difference rule. The product rule says that 
if f and g are differentiable functions, then the derivative of the product f of x times
g of x is equal to f of x times the derivative of g of x plus the derivative of f of x times
g of x. In other words, to take the derivative of a product, we take the first function times
the derivative of the second, plus the derivative of the first times the second. Let's use this
in an example. To take the derivative of the square root of t times e to the t, we have
to take the first function squared of t times the derivative of the second function, plus
the derivative of the first function The difference rule can be proved just like
the sum rule by writing out the definition of derivative and regrouping terms. Or we
could use kind of a sneaky shortcut, and put together two of our previous roles. So if
we think of f of x minus g of x as being f of x plus minus one times g of x, then we
can use the sum rule to rewrite this as a sum of derivatives, and then use the constant
multiplier rule to pull the constant of negative one out, and then we have exactly what we
wanted to prove. So in this video, we gave the proof of the content multiple rule, the
summon difference rules, and a proof of the power rule when n is a positive integer. This
video gives rules for calculating derivatives of functions that are products, or quotients
of other functions. In this video, you'll find statements of the product rule and the
quotient rule, and some examples. But no proofs, proofs are in a separate video. Before we
start, let's recall the Psalm and the difference rules. If f and g are differentiable functions,
then the derivative of the psalm f of x plus g of x is just the sum of the derivatives.
And a similar statement holds for differences. The derivative of the difference is the difference
of the derivatives. So does the same sort of rule hold for products of functions, in
other words, is the derivative of the product equal to the product of the derivatives? Let's
look at a simple example. To find out. For example, if f of x is x, and g of x is x squared,
then if we take the derivative of the product, x times x squared, well, that's just the derivative
of x cubed. We know how to do that with the power rule. So it's 3x squared. On the other
hand, if we look at the product of the derivatives, we get one times 2x or just 2x. And these
two things are not equal. So unfortunately, the answer is no such a simple product rule
does not hold. But not lose hope. There is a product rule, it's just a little more complicated
than the sum and difference rule. The product rule says that if f and g are differentiable
functions, then the derivative of the product f of x times g of x is equal to f of x times
the derivative of g of x plus the derivative of f of x times g of x. In other words, to
take the derivative of a product, we take the first function times the derivative of
the second, plus the derivative of the first times the second. Let's use this in an example.
To take the derivative of the square root of t times e to the t, we have to take the
first function squared of t times the derivative of the second function, plus the derivative
of the first function times the second function. So that's the square
root of t times the derivative of e to the t is just e to the t. times the second function. So that's the square
root of t times the derivative of e to the t is just e to the t. And to find the derivative of the square root
of t, it's going to be easier to write it in exponential form. Now we can just use the
power roll. Bring down the one half t to the one half minus one is negative one half and
I found the derivative. I'm going to clean this up a little bit, and I'm done. quotient
rule says that the derivative of a quotient of two functions And to find the derivative of the square root
of t, it's going to be easier to write it in exponential form. Now we can just use the
power roll. Bring down the one half t to the one half minus one is negative one half and
I found the derivative. I'm going to clean this up a little bit, and I'm done. quotient
rule says that the derivative of a quotient of two functions is given By this quotient on the denominator,
we have the denominator function g of x squared. And on the numerator, we have g of x times
the derivative is given By this quotient on the denominator,
we have the denominator function g of x squared. And on the numerator, we have g of x times
the derivative of f of x of f of x minus f of x times the derivative of g of
x. The way I remember this is this chant. If you think of f of x as the high function,
and g of x is a low function, you can say this is low D high minus high D low minus f of x times the derivative of g of
x. The way I remember this is this chant. If you think of f of x as the high function,
and g of x is a low function, you can say this is low D high minus high D low over low low, over low low, we're low low means the low function squared.
Let's start with a pretty simple example. So this derivative, taking us back to z here, we're low low means the low function squared.
Let's start with a pretty simple example. So this derivative, taking us back to z here, we put the low low on the bottom, and then
we go low, we put the low low on the bottom, and then
we go low, D high. D high. z squared is to z minus high, D low the derivative
of Z's cubed plus one is three z squared plus zero, don't really need to write the zero
there, I can simplify here a little bit to z to the fourth plus two z minus three z to
the fourth, z squared is to z minus high, D low the derivative
of Z's cubed plus one is three z squared plus zero, don't really need to write the zero
there, I can simplify here a little bit to z to the fourth plus two z minus three z to
the fourth, over, I'm over, I'm not going to bother multiplying out this denominator,
I think it looks simpler with it factored. So when I cancel things on the numerator,
I'm getting to z minus z to the fourth over z cubed plus one squared as the derivative
of my quotient. So in this video, we saw the product rule and the quotient rule. I've written
the rules here using the prime notation instead of the dy dx notation, but you should check
that the formulas are really the same as before. For the proofs of these fabulously useful
rules, you'll have to watch the next video. In this video, I'll prove the product rule
and the quotient rule, along with one more related rule, called the reciprocal rule.
First, the proof of the product rule. To find the derivative of the product, f of x times
g of x, I'm going to start as usual with the limit definition of derivative. So the limit
as h goes to zero of f of x plus h g of x plus h minus f of x g of x, Oliver H. Now
I'd like to make this expression here look more like the expression above it, which is
where I'm heading for. And to do this, I'm going to use a classic trick of adding zero
to my expression and kind of a devious way. So I'm going to rewrite my expression, leaving
the first term and the last term of the numerator as they are, but inserting two new terms that
cancel. So I'm subtracting the term, f of x, g of x plus h, and then adding it back
again. So they won't change the value of my expression. This is not as pointless as it
seems, because now we can factor out the common factor of g of x plus h from the first two
terms, and the common factor of f of x from the next two terms. So I'm going to do that.
And now I'll rewrite again, splitting up my sum into two pieces here. You can use just
algebra fractions to see that this expression here and this expression here are the same.
Notice that I'm taking the limit of this entire expression here. Now my limit rules allow
me to rewrite this limit as four separate limits, provided that these four limits do
in fact exist, which that tell you show you in a moment that they do. So this first limit
here is just equal to g of x, because G is a continuous function. G is continuous because
by assumption it's differentiable, so it has to be continuous. This second limit here,
you'll recognize as the definition of the derivative of f, so that limit exists at equals
d dx of f of x. The third limit, well, f of x has nothing to do with age. So that limit
is just f of x. And finally, the fourth limit is the derivative of g. And we've done it.
Well, modulus some minor rearrangement, you'll see that this expression here, is exactly
the same as this expression here, just with the order of the terms switched around. Before
we go on to prove the quotient rule, it'll be really handy to prove the reciprocal rule,
which states that the derivative of reciprocal, one over f of x is given by negative the derivative
of f of x divided by f of x squared. So to prove this fact, let's start as usual, with
the definition of derivative. The derivative of one over f of x is the limit as h goes
to zero of one over f of not going to bother multiplying out this denominator,
I think it looks simpler with it factored. So when I cancel things on the numerator,
I'm getting to z minus z to the fourth over z cubed plus one squared as the derivative
of my quotient. So in this video, we saw the product rule and the quotient rule. I've written
the rules here using the prime notation instead of the dy dx notation, but you should check
that the formulas are really the same as before. For the proofs of these fabulously useful
rules, you'll have to watch the next video. In this video, I'll prove the product rule
and the quotient rule, along with one more related rule, called the reciprocal rule.
First, the proof of the product rule. To find the derivative of the product, f of x times
g of x, I'm going to start as usual with the limit definition of derivative. So the limit
as h goes to zero of f of x plus h g of x plus h minus f of x g of x, Oliver H. Now
I'd like to make this expression here look more like the expression above it, which is
where I'm heading for. And to do this, I'm going to use a classic trick of adding zero
to my expression and kind of a devious way. So I'm going to rewrite my expression, leaving
the first term and the last term of the numerator as they are, but inserting two new terms that
cancel. So I'm subtracting the term, f of x, g of x plus h, and then adding it back
again. So they won't change the value of my expression. This is not as pointless as it
seems, because now we can factor out the common factor of g of x plus h from the first two
terms, and the common factor of f of x from the next two terms. So I'm going to do that.
And now I'll rewrite again, splitting up my sum into two pieces here. You can use just
algebra fractions to see that this expression here and this expression here are the same.
Notice that I'm taking the limit of this entire expression here. Now my limit rules allow
me to rewrite this limit as four separate limits, provided that these four limits do
in fact exist, which that tell you show you in a moment that they do. So this first limit
here is just equal to g of x, because G is a continuous function. G is continuous because
by assumption it's differentiable, so it has to be continuous. This second limit here,
you'll recognize as the definition of the derivative of f, so that limit exists at equals
d dx of f of x. The third limit, well, f of x has nothing to do with age. So that limit
is just f of x. And finally, the fourth limit is the derivative of g. And we've done it.
Well, modulus some minor rearrangement, you'll see that this expression here, is exactly
the same as this expression here, just with the order of the terms switched around. Before
we go on to prove the quotient rule, it'll be really handy to prove the reciprocal rule,
which states that the derivative of reciprocal, one over f of x is given by negative the derivative
of f of x divided by f of x squared. So to prove this fact, let's start as usual, with
the definition of derivative. The derivative of one over f of x is the limit as h goes
to zero of one over f of x plus x plus h minus one over f of x over h. Now, these
fractions here are just crying out to be combined by finding a common denominator that common
denominators f of x plus h times f of x. So let me do that. I've just multiplied the first
fraction by f of x over f of x and the second fraction by f of x plus h over f of x plus
h in order to rewrite with a common denominator. So that gives me f of x minus f of x plus
h divided by f of x plus h times f of x. And instead of dividing this whole thing by H,
I'll multiply it by one of our age, which gives me another factor of H in the denominator.
Now, this expression here is looking a lot like the derivative of h minus one over f of x over h. Now, these
fractions here are just crying out to be combined by finding a common denominator that common
denominators f of x plus h times f of x. So let me do that. I've just multiplied the first
fraction by f of x over f of x and the second fraction by f of x plus h over f of x plus
h in order to rewrite with a common denominator. So that gives me f of x minus f of x plus
h divided by f of x plus h times f of x. And instead of dividing this whole thing by H,
I'll multiply it by one of our age, which gives me another factor of H in the denominator.
Now, this expression here is looking a lot like the derivative of f. f. It's just in the reverse order. So let me
factor out a negative sign in order to let me switch that order here. So this becomes
f of x plus h minus f of x over h, and then I've got the times one over f of x plus h
times f of x. Now I can split this limit up first, I'll factor out the negative sign.
And then I'll write this product as a product of two limits, which I can do provided the
component limits exist. And I'll check that these limits do exist. Let's see the first
limit here. The first limit here is just the derivative of It's just in the reverse order. So let me
factor out a negative sign in order to let me switch that order here. So this becomes
f of x plus h minus f of x over h, and then I've got the times one over f of x plus h
times f of x. Now I can split this limit up first, I'll factor out the negative sign.
And then I'll write this product as a product of two limits, which I can do provided the
component limits exist. And I'll check that these limits do exist. Let's see the first
limit here. The first limit here is just the derivative of f. f. And the second limit here exists because f
is continuous, f is continuous since is differentiable. So by continuity, as H is going to zero, since
x plus h is approaching x, f of x plus h is just approaching f of x. And I can rewrite
this limit as one over f of x times f of x. And so this is in other words, negative the
derivative of f of x divided by f of x squared. Now we've proved the reciprocal rule. Now
we're in a great position to prove the quotient rule with very little effort. So instead of
going back to the definition of derivative, this time, I'm just gonna think of the quotient
f of x over g of x as a product of f of x times the reciprocal And the second limit here exists because f
is continuous, f is continuous since is differentiable. So by continuity, as H is going to zero, since
x plus h is approaching x, f of x plus h is just approaching f of x. And I can rewrite
this limit as one over f of x times f of x. And so this is in other words, negative the
derivative of f of x divided by f of x squared. Now we've proved the reciprocal rule. Now
we're in a great position to prove the quotient rule with very little effort. So instead of
going back to the definition of derivative, this time, I'm just gonna think of the quotient
f of x over g of x as a product of f of x times the reciprocal of g of x. of g of x. And now, by the product rule, that's just
the first function times the derivative of the second plus the derivative of the first
times the second. And by the quotient rule, the derivative of this reciprocal is negative
derivative of g over g of x squared. And I still have this second term here, which I'm
just going to write as derivative f of x divided by g of x. And now, by the product rule, that's just
the first function times the derivative of the second plus the derivative of the first
times the second. And by the quotient rule, the derivative of this reciprocal is negative
derivative of g over g of x squared. And I still have this second term here, which I'm
just going to write as derivative f of x divided by g of x. Okay, Okay, so we're almost there. If we combine these
two fractions, using a common denominator of g of x squared, we just have to multiply
this second fraction by g of x over g of x to get that common denominator. Now we get
negative f of x times the derivative of g of x plus the derivative of f of x times g
of x divided by g of x squared. And hopefully, this bottom expression is the same as this
top expression. And, yes, after rearranging the terms it is. So that's the end of the
proof of the quotient rule. So this video gave proofs of the product rule, the reciprocal
rule, and then the quotient rule. This video is about two limits involving trig functions
that turn out to be very useful. Namely, the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta so we're almost there. If we combine these
two fractions, using a common denominator of g of x squared, we just have to multiply
this second fraction by g of x over g of x to get that common denominator. Now we get
negative f of x times the derivative of g of x plus the derivative of f of x times g
of x divided by g of x squared. And hopefully, this bottom expression is the same as this
top expression. And, yes, after rearranging the terms it is. So that's the end of the
proof of the quotient rule. So this video gave proofs of the product rule, the reciprocal
rule, and then the quotient rule. This video is about two limits involving trig functions
that turn out to be very useful. Namely, the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta. And the limit as theta goes to
zero of cosine theta minus one over theta. These limits turn out to have really nice
simple answers, as long as we keep theta in radians, over theta. And the limit as theta goes to
zero of cosine theta minus one over theta. These limits turn out to have really nice
simple answers, as long as we keep theta in radians, not degrees. Let's consider the limit on the
left first, that's the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta. Notice that
we can't just evaluate this limit by plugging in zero for theta, because as theta goes to
zero sine theta, and the numerator also goes to zero, and theta itself goes to zero, so
we end up with a zero over zero indeterminate form. We can however, build up some evidence
of what this limit by might be by using a calculator and a table of values, or by looking
at a graph. So here's the theta axis. And here's the y axis. And you can see that as
theta goes to zero from either the right or the left, it's looking like the y value is
going to one. The second limit here on the right, is also zero over zero and determinant
form. Since as theta goes to zero, cosine theta goes to one, so cosine theta minus one
goes to zero. But again, looking at the graph, we have some evidence to suggest that as theta
goes to zero, our expression is also going to not degrees. Let's consider the limit on the
left first, that's the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta. Notice that
we can't just evaluate this limit by plugging in zero for theta, because as theta goes to
zero sine theta, and the numerator also goes to zero, and theta itself goes to zero, so
we end up with a zero over zero indeterminate form. We can however, build up some evidence
of what this limit by might be by using a calculator and a table of values, or by looking
at a graph. So here's the theta axis. And here's the y axis. And you can see that as
theta goes to zero from either the right or the left, it's looking like the y value is
going to one. The second limit here on the right, is also zero over zero and determinant
form. Since as theta goes to zero, cosine theta goes to one, so cosine theta minus one
goes to zero. But again, looking at the graph, we have some evidence to suggest that as theta
goes to zero, our expression is also going to zero. zero. these graphs provide strong evidence, but
graphs can be misleading, and they're no substitute for a rigorous proof. So for a pretty cool
geometric and algebraic proof of these facts, please see the proof video for this section.
The fact that the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta is one is really
handy when you want to approximate sine theta. Because intuitively, this is saying that sine
theta is approximately equal to theta itself when theta is near zero, because the ratio
is approximately one. So if I want to approximate sine of this value of theta, without a calculator,
I can use that fact. And say that the sine of 0.01769 is going to be approximately equal
to 0.01769. This is an important time to remind you that when we're doing these limits, we're
assuming that theta is in radians. If it's not in radians, we won't get this nice limit
of one here. So that's our approximation. And we can check it on a calculator, and I
actually get an exact value of this number up to 10 decimal places. So as you can see,
this is a really good approximation. We can use this same limit fat, again, in the next
example, to calculate this complicated limit as x goes to zero, the limit of tan of 7x
over sine of forex. So when I see tangents and signs and expression, I'm always tempted
to rewrite things. And just in terms of sine and cosine, so I'm going to do that first
I'm going to rewrite tangent as as sine over cosine. That still divided by sine of forex,
and now I'm going to flip and multiply to get sine of 7x over cosine of 7x times one
over sine of 4x. Now intuitively, if x is near zero, therefore 7x and 4x are also near
zero, then sine of 7x is approximately equal to 7x. And sine of 4x is approximately equal
to 4x. So intuitively, this limit should be pretty much the same thing as the limit as
x goes to zero of 7x over cosine 7x times 4x. And canceling the access, this is just
the same as seven fourths times the limit of one of our cosine 7x. Since cosine of 7x
is going to one, this should just be seven fourths. So this is the intuitive approach,
let me also give you a more rigorous approach. So more rigorously, I'm going to rewrite this
limit by multiplying by 7x over 7x. And by multiplying by 4x, over 4x, that hasn't changed
my expression, I'm just multiplying by one and fancy forms. But this is really useful.
Because if I regroup here, and write the sine 7x over the 7x, times the one over cosine
7x. Now I'm going to write the Forex over the sign for x. And I'm still left with a
7x from the top and a 4x. From the bottom here, I can cancel out those x's. And I can
notice that this limit here, as x goes to 07, x is going to zero, so sine 7x over 7x
is just going to be equal to one. And similarly as x goes to zero, for x is going to zero.
So the limit of 4x ever signed for x is the reciprocal of one, it's also one. And finally,
this limit in the middle here, as x goes to 07, x is going to zero, so cosine of 7x is
going to one, and everything in the world is going to one except the 7/4. So this limit
is seven forth. these graphs provide strong evidence, but
graphs can be misleading, and they're no substitute for a rigorous proof. So for a pretty cool
geometric and algebraic proof of these facts, please see the proof video for this section.
The fact that the limit as theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta is one is really
handy when you want to approximate sine theta. Because intuitively, this is saying that sine
theta is approximately equal to theta itself when theta is near zero, because the ratio
is approximately one. So if I want to approximate sine of this value of theta, without a calculator,
I can use that fact. And say that the sine of 0.01769 is going to be approximately equal
to 0.01769. This is an important time to remind you that when we're doing these limits, we're
assuming that theta is in radians. If it's not in radians, we won't get this nice limit
of one here. So that's our approximation. And we can check it on a calculator, and I
actually get an exact value of this number up to 10 decimal places. So as you can see,
this is a really good approximation. We can use this same limit fat, again, in the next
example, to calculate this complicated limit as x goes to zero, the limit of tan of 7x
over sine of forex. So when I see tangents and signs and expression, I'm always tempted
to rewrite things. And just in terms of sine and cosine, so I'm going to do that first
I'm going to rewrite tangent as as sine over cosine. That still divided by sine of forex,
and now I'm going to flip and multiply to get sine of 7x over cosine of 7x times one
over sine of 4x. Now intuitively, if x is near zero, therefore 7x and 4x are also near
zero, then sine of 7x is approximately equal to 7x. And sine of 4x is approximately equal
to 4x. So intuitively, this limit should be pretty much the same thing as the limit as
x goes to zero of 7x over cosine 7x times 4x. And canceling the access, this is just
the same as seven fourths times the limit of one of our cosine 7x. Since cosine of 7x
is going to one, this should just be seven fourths. So this is the intuitive approach,
let me also give you a more rigorous approach. So more rigorously, I'm going to rewrite this
limit by multiplying by 7x over 7x. And by multiplying by 4x, over 4x, that hasn't changed
my expression, I'm just multiplying by one and fancy forms. But this is really useful.
Because if I regroup here, and write the sine 7x over the 7x, times the one over cosine
7x. Now I'm going to write the Forex over the sign for x. And I'm still left with a
7x from the top and a 4x. From the bottom here, I can cancel out those x's. And I can
notice that this limit here, as x goes to 07, x is going to zero, so sine 7x over 7x
is just going to be equal to one. And similarly as x goes to zero, for x is going to zero.
So the limit of 4x ever signed for x is the reciprocal of one, it's also one. And finally,
this limit in the middle here, as x goes to 07, x is going to zero, so cosine of 7x is
going to one, and everything in the world is going to one except the 7/4. So this limit
is seven forth. In this video, we found that the limit as
theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta is equal to one. And the limit as theta goes
to zero of cosine theta minus one over theta is equal to zero. There's a nice proof of
these facts in a later video for this section. When you compose two functions, you apply
the first function. And then you apply the second function to the output of the first
function. For example, the first function might compute population size from time in
years. In this video, we found that the limit as
theta goes to zero of sine theta over theta is equal to one. And the limit as theta goes
to zero of cosine theta minus one over theta is equal to zero. There's a nice proof of
these facts in a later video for this section. When you compose two functions, you apply
the first function. And then you apply the second function to the output of the first
function. For example, the first function might compute population size from time in
years. So its input would be time in years, since
a certain date, as output would be number of people in the population. The second function
g, might compute health care costs as a function of population size. So it will take population
size as input, and its output will be healthcare costs. If you put these functions together,
that is compose them, then you'll go all the way from time in years to healthcare costs.
This is your composition, g composed with F. The composition of two functions, written
g with a little circle, f of x is defined as follows. g composed with f of x is G evaluated
on f of x, we can think of it schematically and so diagram, f acts on a number x and produces
a number f of x, then g takes that output f of x and produces a new number, g of f of
x. Our composition of functions g composed with F is the function that goes all the way
from X to g of f of x. Let's work out some examples where our functions are defined by
tables of values. If we want to find g composed with F of four, by definition, this means
g of f of four. To evaluate this expression, we always work from the inside out. So we
start with the x value of four, and we find f of four using the table of values for f
of x. When x equals four, f of x is seven, so we can replace F of four with the number
seven. Now we need to evaluate g of seven, seven becomes our new x value in our table
of values for G, the x value of seven corresponds to the G of X value of 10. So g of seven is
equal to 10. We found that g composed with F of four is equal to 10. If instead we want
to find f composed with g of four, well, we can rewrite that is f of g of four, and again,
work from the inside out. Now we're trying to find g of four, so four is our x value.
And we use our table of values for G to see that g of four is one. So we replaced by a
four by one, and now we need to evaluate f of one. Using our table for F values, f of
one is eight. Notice that when we've computed g of f of four, we got a different answer
there when we computed F of G, F four. And in general, g composed with F is not the same
thing as f composed with g. So its input would be time in years, since
a certain date, as output would be number of people in the population. The second function
g, might compute health care costs as a function of population size. So it will take population
size as input, and its output will be healthcare costs. If you put these functions together,
that is compose them, then you'll go all the way from time in years to healthcare costs.
This is your composition, g composed with F. The composition of two functions, written
g with a little circle, f of x is defined as follows. g composed with f of x is G evaluated
on f of x, we can think of it schematically and so diagram, f acts on a number x and produces
a number f of x, then g takes that output f of x and produces a new number, g of f of
x. Our composition of functions g composed with F is the function that goes all the way
from X to g of f of x. Let's work out some examples where our functions are defined by
tables of values. If we want to find g composed with F of four, by definition, this means
g of f of four. To evaluate this expression, we always work from the inside out. So we
start with the x value of four, and we find f of four using the table of values for f
of x. When x equals four, f of x is seven, so we can replace F of four with the number
seven. Now we need to evaluate g of seven, seven becomes our new x value in our table
of values for G, the x value of seven corresponds to the G of X value of 10. So g of seven is
equal to 10. We found that g composed with F of four is equal to 10. If instead we want
to find f composed with g of four, well, we can rewrite that is f of g of four, and again,
work from the inside out. Now we're trying to find g of four, so four is our x value.
And we use our table of values for G to see that g of four is one. So we replaced by a
four by one, and now we need to evaluate f of one. Using our table for F values, f of
one is eight. Notice that when we've computed g of f of four, we got a different answer
there when we computed F of G, F four. And in general, g composed with F is not the same
thing as f composed with g. Please Please pause the video and take a moment to compute
the next two examples. We can replace f composed with F of two by the equivalent expression,
f of f of two. Working from the inside out, we know that f of two is three, and f of three
is six. If we want to find f composed with g of six, rewrite that as f of g of six isn't
the table for g, g of six is eight. But F of eight, eight is not on the table as an
x value for the for the f function. And so there is no F of eight, this does not exist,
we can say that six is not in the domain, for F composed with g. Even though it was
in the domain of g, we couldn't follow all the way through and get a value for F composed
with g of six. Next, let's turn our attention to the composition of functions that are given
by equations. pause the video and take a moment to compute
the next two examples. We can replace f composed with F of two by the equivalent expression,
f of f of two. Working from the inside out, we know that f of two is three, and f of three
is six. If we want to find f composed with g of six, rewrite that as f of g of six isn't
the table for g, g of six is eight. But F of eight, eight is not on the table as an
x value for the for the f function. And so there is no F of eight, this does not exist,
we can say that six is not in the domain, for F composed with g. Even though it was
in the domain of g, we couldn't follow all the way through and get a value for F composed
with g of six. Next, let's turn our attention to the composition of functions that are given
by equations. p of x is x squared plus x and q of x is negative
2x. We want to find q composed with P of one. p of x is x squared plus x and q of x is negative
2x. We want to find q composed with P of one. As usual, I can rewrite this as Q of P of
one and work from the inside out. P of one is one squared plus one, so that's two. So
this is the same thing as Q of two. But queue of two is negative two times two or negative
four. So this evaluates to negative four. In this next example, we want to find q composed
with P of some arbitrary x, or rewrite it as usual as Q of p of x and work from the
inside out. Well, p of x, we know the formula for that, that's x squared plus x. So I can
replace my P of x with that expression. Now, I'm stuck with evaluating q on x squared plus
x. Well queue of anything is negative two times that thing. So q of x squared plus x
is going to be negative two times the quantity x squared plus x, what I've done is I've substituted
in the whole expression x squared plus x, where I saw the X in this formula for q of
x, it's important to use the parentheses here, so that we'll be multiplying negative two
by the whole expression and not just by the first piece, I can simplify this a bit as
negative 2x squared minus 2x. And that's my expression for Q composed with p of x. Notice
that if I wanted to compute q composed with P of one, which I already did in the first
problem, I could just use this expression now, negative two times one squared minus
two and I get negative four, just like I did before. Let's try another one. Let's try p
composed with q of x. First I read right this P of q of x. Working from the inside out,
I can replace q of x with negative 2x. So I need to compute P of negative 2x. Here's
my formula for P. to compute P of this expression, I need to plug in this expression everywhere
I see an x in the formula for P. So that means negative 2x squared plus negative 2x. Again,
being careful to use parentheses to make sure I plug in the entire expression in for x.
let me simplify. This is 4x squared minus 2x. Notice that I got different expressions
for Q of p of x. And for P of q of x. Once again, we see that q composed with P is not
necessarily equal to P composed with Q. Please pause the video and try this last example
yourself rewriting and working from the inside out, we're going to replace p of x with its
expression x squared plus x. And then we need to evaluate p on x squared As usual, I can rewrite this as Q of P of
one and work from the inside out. P of one is one squared plus one, so that's two. So
this is the same thing as Q of two. But queue of two is negative two times two or negative
four. So this evaluates to negative four. In this next example, we want to find q composed
with P of some arbitrary x, or rewrite it as usual as Q of p of x and work from the
inside out. Well, p of x, we know the formula for that, that's x squared plus x. So I can
replace my P of x with that expression. Now, I'm stuck with evaluating q on x squared plus
x. Well queue of anything is negative two times that thing. So q of x squared plus x
is going to be negative two times the quantity x squared plus x, what I've done is I've substituted
in the whole expression x squared plus x, where I saw the X in this formula for q of
x, it's important to use the parentheses here, so that we'll be multiplying negative two
by the whole expression and not just by the first piece, I can simplify this a bit as
negative 2x squared minus 2x. And that's my expression for Q composed with p of x. Notice
that if I wanted to compute q composed with P of one, which I already did in the first
problem, I could just use this expression now, negative two times one squared minus
two and I get negative four, just like I did before. Let's try another one. Let's try p
composed with q of x. First I read right this P of q of x. Working from the inside out,
I can replace q of x with negative 2x. So I need to compute P of negative 2x. Here's
my formula for P. to compute P of this expression, I need to plug in this expression everywhere
I see an x in the formula for P. So that means negative 2x squared plus negative 2x. Again,
being careful to use parentheses to make sure I plug in the entire expression in for x.
let me simplify. This is 4x squared minus 2x. Notice that I got different expressions
for Q of p of x. And for P of q of x. Once again, we see that q composed with P is not
necessarily equal to P composed with Q. Please pause the video and try this last example
yourself rewriting and working from the inside out, we're going to replace p of x with its
expression x squared plus x. And then we need to evaluate p on x squared plus x. plus x. That means we plug in That means we plug in x squared plus x, x squared plus x, everywhere we see an x in this formula, so
that's x squared plus x quantity squared plus x squared plus x. Once again, I can simplify
by distributing out, that gives me x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus x squared plus x
squared plus x, or x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus 2x squared plus x. In this last
set of examples, we're asked to go backwards, we're given a formula for a function of h
of x. But we're supposed to rewrite h of x as a composition of two functions, F and G.
Let's think for a minute, which of these two functions gets applied first, f composed with
g of x, let's see, that means f of g of x. And since we evaluate these expressions from
the inside out, we must be applying g first, and then F. In order to figure out what what
f and g could be, I like to draw a box around some thing inside my expression for H, so
I'm going to draw a box around x squared plus seven, then whatever's inside the box, that'll
be my function, g of x, the first function that gets applied, whatever happens to the
box, in this case, taking the square root sign, that becomes my outside function, my
second function f. So here, we're gonna say g of x is equal to x squared plus seven, and
f of x is equal to the square root of x, let's just check and make sure that this works.
So I need to check that when I take the composition, f composed with g, I need to get the same
thing as my original h. So let's see, if I do f composed with g of x, well, by definition,
that's f of g of x. everywhere we see an x in this formula, so
that's x squared plus x quantity squared plus x squared plus x. Once again, I can simplify
by distributing out, that gives me x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus x squared plus x
squared plus x, or x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus 2x squared plus x. In this last
set of examples, we're asked to go backwards, we're given a formula for a function of h
of x. But we're supposed to rewrite h of x as a composition of two functions, F and G.
Let's think for a minute, which of these two functions gets applied first, f composed with
g of x, let's see, that means f of g of x. And since we evaluate these expressions from
the inside out, we must be applying g first, and then F. In order to figure out what what
f and g could be, I like to draw a box around some thing inside my expression for H, so
I'm going to draw a box around x squared plus seven, then whatever's inside the box, that'll
be my function, g of x, the first function that gets applied, whatever happens to the
box, in this case, taking the square root sign, that becomes my outside function, my
second function f. So here, we're gonna say g of x is equal to x squared plus seven, and
f of x is equal to the square root of x, let's just check and make sure that this works.
So I need to check that when I take the composition, f composed with g, I need to get the same
thing as my original h. So let's see, if I do f composed with g of x, well, by definition,
that's f of g of x. Working from the inside out, I can replace
g of x with its formula x squared plus seven. So I need to evaluate f of x squared plus
seven. That means I plug in x squared plus seven, into the formula for for F. So that
becomes the square root of x squared plus seven, two, it works because it matches my
original equation. So we found a correct answer a correct way of breaking h down as a composition
of two functions. But I do want to point out, this is not the only correct answer. I'll
write down my formula for H of X again, and this time, I'll put the box in a different
place, I'll just box the x squared. If I did that, then my inside function, my first function,
g of x would be x squared. And my second function is what happens Working from the inside out, I can replace
g of x with its formula x squared plus seven. So I need to evaluate f of x squared plus
seven. That means I plug in x squared plus seven, into the formula for for F. So that
becomes the square root of x squared plus seven, two, it works because it matches my
original equation. So we found a correct answer a correct way of breaking h down as a composition
of two functions. But I do want to point out, this is not the only correct answer. I'll
write down my formula for H of X again, and this time, I'll put the box in a different
place, I'll just box the x squared. If I did that, then my inside function, my first function,
g of x would be x squared. And my second function is what happens to the box. to the box. So my f of x is what happens to the box, and
the box gets added seven to it, and taking the square root. So in other words, f of x
is going to be the square root of x plus seven. Again, I can check that this works. If I do
f composed with g of x, that's f So my f of x is what happens to the box, and
the box gets added seven to it, and taking the square root. So in other words, f of x
is going to be the square root of x plus seven. Again, I can check that this works. If I do
f composed with g of x, that's f of g of x. of g of x. So now g of x is x squared, so I'm taking
f of x squared. When I plug in x squared for x, I do in fact get the square root of x squared
plus seven. So this is an alternative correct solution. In this video, we learn to evaluate
the composition of functions. by rewriting it and working from the inside out. We also
learn to break apart a complicated function into a composition of two functions by boxing
one piece of the function and letting the first function applied in the composition.
Let that be the inside of the box and the second function applied in the composition
be whatever happens to the box. So now g of x is x squared, so I'm taking
f of x squared. When I plug in x squared for x, I do in fact get the square root of x squared
plus seven. So this is an alternative correct solution. In this video, we learn to evaluate
the composition of functions. by rewriting it and working from the inside out. We also
learn to break apart a complicated function into a composition of two functions by boxing
one piece of the function and letting the first function applied in the composition.
Let that be the inside of the box and the second function applied in the composition
be whatever happens to the box. This video is about solving rational equations.
A rational equation like this one equation that has rational expressions and that, in
other words, an equation that has some variables in the denominator. There are several different
approaches for solving a rational equation, but they all start by finding the least common
denominator. In this example, the denominators are x plus three and x, we can think of one
as just having a denominator of one. Since the denominators don't have any factors in
common, I can find the least common denominator just by multiplying them together. My next
step is going to be clearing the denominator. By this, I mean that I multiply both sides
of my equation by this least common denominator, x plus three times x, I multiply on the left
side of the equation, and I multiply by the same thing on the right side of the equation.
Since I'm doing the same thing to both sides of the equation, I don't change the the value
of the equation. Multiplying the least common denominator on both sides of the equation
is equivalent to multiplying it by all three terms in the equation, I can see this when
I multiply out, I'll rewrite the left side the same as before, pretty much. And then
I'll distribute the right side to get x plus three times x times one plus x plus three
times x times one over x. So I've actually multiplied the least common denominator by
all three terms of my equation. Now I can have a blast canceling things. The x plus
three cancels with the x plus three on the denominator. The here are nothing cancels
out because there's no denominator, and here are the x in the numerator cancels with the
x in the denominator. So I can rewrite my expression as x squared equals x plus three
times x times one plus x plus three. Now I'm going to simplify. So I'll leave the x squared
alone on this side, I'll distribute out x squared plus 3x plus x plus three, hey, look,
the x squared is cancel on both sides. And so I get zero equals 4x plus three, so 4x
is negative three, and x is negative three fourths. Finally, I'm going to plug in my
answer to check. This is a good idea for any kind of equation. But it's especially important
for a rational equation because occasionally for rational equations, you'll get what's
called extraneous solution solutions that don't actually work in your original equation
because they make the denominator zero. Now, in this example, I don't think we're going
to get the extraneous equations, because negative three fourths is not going to make any of
these denominators zero, so it should work out fine when I plug in. If I plug in, I get
this, I can simplify the denominator here, negative three fourths plus three, three is
12, for sets becomes nine fourths, and this is one or flip and multiply to get minus four
thirds. So here, I can simplify my complex fraction, it ends up being negative three
nights, and one minus four thirds is negative 1/3. So that all seems to check out. And so
my final answer is x equals negative three fourths. This next example looks a little
trickier. And it is, but the same approach will work. First off, find the least common
denominator. So here, my denominators are c minus five, c plus one, and C squared minus
four c minus five, I'm going to factor that as C minus five times c plus one. Now, my
least common denominator needs to have just enough factors to that each of these denominators
divided into it. So I need the factor c minus five, I need the factor c plus one. And now
I've already got all the factors I need for this denominator. So here is my least common
denominator. Next step is to clear the denominators. So I do this by multiplying both sides of
the equation by my least common denominator. In fact, I can just multiply each of the three
terms by this least common denominator. I went ahead and wrote my third denominator
in factored form to make it easier to see what cancels. Now canceling time dies, this
dies, and both of those factors die. This video is about solving rational equations.
A rational equation like this one equation that has rational expressions and that, in
other words, an equation that has some variables in the denominator. There are several different
approaches for solving a rational equation, but they all start by finding the least common
denominator. In this example, the denominators are x plus three and x, we can think of one
as just having a denominator of one. Since the denominators don't have any factors in
common, I can find the least common denominator just by multiplying them together. My next
step is going to be clearing the denominator. By this, I mean that I multiply both sides
of my equation by this least common denominator, x plus three times x, I multiply on the left
side of the equation, and I multiply by the same thing on the right side of the equation.
Since I'm doing the same thing to both sides of the equation, I don't change the the value
of the equation. Multiplying the least common denominator on both sides of the equation
is equivalent to multiplying it by all three terms in the equation, I can see this when
I multiply out, I'll rewrite the left side the same as before, pretty much. And then
I'll distribute the right side to get x plus three times x times one plus x plus three
times x times one over x. So I've actually multiplied the least common denominator by
all three terms of my equation. Now I can have a blast canceling things. The x plus
three cancels with the x plus three on the denominator. The here are nothing cancels
out because there's no denominator, and here are the x in the numerator cancels with the
x in the denominator. So I can rewrite my expression as x squared equals x plus three
times x times one plus x plus three. Now I'm going to simplify. So I'll leave the x squared
alone on this side, I'll distribute out x squared plus 3x plus x plus three, hey, look,
the x squared is cancel on both sides. And so I get zero equals 4x plus three, so 4x
is negative three, and x is negative three fourths. Finally, I'm going to plug in my
answer to check. This is a good idea for any kind of equation. But it's especially important
for a rational equation because occasionally for rational equations, you'll get what's
called extraneous solution solutions that don't actually work in your original equation
because they make the denominator zero. Now, in this example, I don't think we're going
to get the extraneous equations, because negative three fourths is not going to make any of
these denominators zero, so it should work out fine when I plug in. If I plug in, I get
this, I can simplify the denominator here, negative three fourths plus three, three is
12, for sets becomes nine fourths, and this is one or flip and multiply to get minus four
thirds. So here, I can simplify my complex fraction, it ends up being negative three
nights, and one minus four thirds is negative 1/3. So that all seems to check out. And so
my final answer is x equals negative three fourths. This next example looks a little
trickier. And it is, but the same approach will work. First off, find the least common
denominator. So here, my denominators are c minus five, c plus one, and C squared minus
four c minus five, I'm going to factor that as C minus five times c plus one. Now, my
least common denominator needs to have just enough factors to that each of these denominators
divided into it. So I need the factor c minus five, I need the factor c plus one. And now
I've already got all the factors I need for this denominator. So here is my least common
denominator. Next step is to clear the denominators. So I do this by multiplying both sides of
the equation by my least common denominator. In fact, I can just multiply each of the three
terms by this least common denominator. I went ahead and wrote my third denominator
in factored form to make it easier to see what cancels. Now canceling time dies, this
dies, and both of those factors die. cancel out the denominators, the whole point
of multiplying by the least common denominator, you're multiplying by something that's big
enough to kill every single denominator so you don't have to deal with denominators anymore.
Now I'm going to simplify by multiplying out. So I get, let's see, c plus one times four
c, that's four c squared plus four c, now I get minus just c minus five, and then over
here, I get three c squared plus three, I can rewrite the minus quantity c minus five
as a minus c plus five. And now I can subtract the three c squared from both sides to get
just a C squared over here, and the four c minus c, that becomes a three C. And finally,
I can subtract the three from both sides to get c squared plus three c plus two equals
zero. got myself a quadratic equation that looks like a nice one that factors. So this
factors to C plus one times c plus two equals zero. So either c plus one is zero, or C plus
two is zero, so C equals negative one, or C equals negative two. Now let's see, we need
to still check our answers. Without even going to the trouble of calculating anything, I
can see that C equals negative one is not going to work, because if I plug it in to
this denominator here, I get a denominator of zero, which doesn't make sense. So C equals
minus one is an extraneous solution, it doesn't actually satisfy my original equation. And
so I can just cross it right out, C equals negative two. I can go if I go ahead, and
that doesn't make any of my denominators zero. So if I haven't made any mistakes, it should
satisfy my original equation, but, but I'll just plug it in to be sure. And after some
simplifying, I get a true statement. So my final answer is C equals negative two. In
this video, we solved a couple of rational equations, using the method of finding the
least common denominator, and then clearing the denominator, we cleared the denominator
by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator or equivalently.
multiplying each of the terms by that denominator. There's another equivalent method that some
people prefer, it still starts out the same, we find the least common denominator, but
then we write all the fractions over that least common denominator. So in this example,
we'd still use the least common denominator of x plus three times x. cancel out the denominators, the whole point
of multiplying by the least common denominator, you're multiplying by something that's big
enough to kill every single denominator so you don't have to deal with denominators anymore.
Now I'm going to simplify by multiplying out. So I get, let's see, c plus one times four
c, that's four c squared plus four c, now I get minus just c minus five, and then over
here, I get three c squared plus three, I can rewrite the minus quantity c minus five
as a minus c plus five. And now I can subtract the three c squared from both sides to get
just a C squared over here, and the four c minus c, that becomes a three C. And finally,
I can subtract the three from both sides to get c squared plus three c plus two equals
zero. got myself a quadratic equation that looks like a nice one that factors. So this
factors to C plus one times c plus two equals zero. So either c plus one is zero, or C plus
two is zero, so C equals negative one, or C equals negative two. Now let's see, we need
to still check our answers. Without even going to the trouble of calculating anything, I
can see that C equals negative one is not going to work, because if I plug it in to
this denominator here, I get a denominator of zero, which doesn't make sense. So C equals
minus one is an extraneous solution, it doesn't actually satisfy my original equation. And
so I can just cross it right out, C equals negative two. I can go if I go ahead, and
that doesn't make any of my denominators zero. So if I haven't made any mistakes, it should
satisfy my original equation, but, but I'll just plug it in to be sure. And after some
simplifying, I get a true statement. So my final answer is C equals negative two. In
this video, we solved a couple of rational equations, using the method of finding the
least common denominator, and then clearing the denominator, we cleared the denominator
by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator or equivalently.
multiplying each of the terms by that denominator. There's another equivalent method that some
people prefer, it still starts out the same, we find the least common denominator, but
then we write all the fractions over that least common denominator. So in this example,
we'd still use the least common denominator of x plus three times x. But our next step would be to write each of
these rational expressions over that common denominator by multiplying the top and the
bottom by the appropriate things. So one, in order to get the common denominator of
x plus 3x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom by x plus three times x, whenever
x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom just by x plus three since that's what's missing
from the denominator x. Now, if I simplify a little bit, let's say this is x squared
over that common denominator, and here I have just x plus three times x over that denominator,
and here I have x plus three over that common denominator. Now add together my fractions
on the right side, so they have a common denominator. So this is x plus three times x plus x plus
three. And now I have two fractions that have that are equal, that have the same denominator,
therefore, their numerators have to be equal also. So the next step is to set the numerators
equal. So I get x squared is x plus three times x plus x plus three. And if you look
back at the previous way, we solve this equation, you'll recognize this equation. And so from
here on we just continue as before. When choosing between these two methods, I personally tend
to prefer the clear the denominators method, because it's a little bit less writing, you
don't have to get rid of those denominators earlier. You don't have to write them as many
times, but some people find this one a little bit easier to remember, a little easier to
understand either of these methods is fine. One last caution. Don't forget at the end,
to check your solutions and eliminate any extraneous solutions. These will be solutions
that make the denominators of your original equation. Go to zero. This video gives the
derivative of sine cosine and other trig functions. A graph of the function y equals sine x is
given in blue here, we can estimate the shape of the derivative of sine x by looking at
the slopes of the tangent lines. Here, when x equals zero, the tangent line has a positive
slope of approximately one. As x increases to pi over two, the slope of the tangent line
is still positive, but decreases to zero. Next, the slope turns negative more and more
negative reaching a negative value of negative one, before returning again to zero. Continuing
like this, we see that the graph of the derivative y equals sine prime of x looks like the graph
of y equals cosine x below. Please pause the video and do a similar exercise for the graph
of y equals cosine of x below, that is use the graph of y equals cosine x to estimate
the shape of the graph of y equals cosine prime of x. Notice that when x equals zero,
the slope of the tangent line here is zero, that slope turns negative, and then reaches
zero again before turning positive. So the graph of the derivative should look something
like this. This new blue graph looks like the vertical reflection of the blue graph
above suggesting that the derivative of cosine of x is equal to the negative of sine of x.
So we have graphical evidence that the derivative of sine x is equal to cosine of x, and the
derivative of cosine of x is equal to negative sine of x. For proofs of these facts, please
see the separate proof video for this section. Once we have the derivatives of sine and cosine,
we have the power to compute the derivatives of a lot of other trig functions as well. But our next step would be to write each of
these rational expressions over that common denominator by multiplying the top and the
bottom by the appropriate things. So one, in order to get the common denominator of
x plus 3x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom by x plus three times x, whenever
x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom just by x plus three since that's what's missing
from the denominator x. Now, if I simplify a little bit, let's say this is x squared
over that common denominator, and here I have just x plus three times x over that denominator,
and here I have x plus three over that common denominator. Now add together my fractions
on the right side, so they have a common denominator. So this is x plus three times x plus x plus
three. And now I have two fractions that have that are equal, that have the same denominator,
therefore, their numerators have to be equal also. So the next step is to set the numerators
equal. So I get x squared is x plus three times x plus x plus three. And if you look
back at the previous way, we solve this equation, you'll recognize this equation. And so from
here on we just continue as before. When choosing between these two methods, I personally tend
to prefer the clear the denominators method, because it's a little bit less writing, you
don't have to get rid of those denominators earlier. You don't have to write them as many
times, but some people find this one a little bit easier to remember, a little easier to
understand either of these methods is fine. One last caution. Don't forget at the end,
to check your solutions and eliminate any extraneous solutions. These will be solutions
that make the denominators of your original equation. Go to zero. This video gives the
derivative of sine cosine and other trig functions. A graph of the function y equals sine x is
given in blue here, we can estimate the shape of the derivative of sine x by looking at
the slopes of the tangent lines. Here, when x equals zero, the tangent line has a positive
slope of approximately one. As x increases to pi over two, the slope of the tangent line
is still positive, but decreases to zero. Next, the slope turns negative more and more
negative reaching a negative value of negative one, before returning again to zero. Continuing
like this, we see that the graph of the derivative y equals sine prime of x looks like the graph
of y equals cosine x below. Please pause the video and do a similar exercise for the graph
of y equals cosine of x below, that is use the graph of y equals cosine x to estimate
the shape of the graph of y equals cosine prime of x. Notice that when x equals zero,
the slope of the tangent line here is zero, that slope turns negative, and then reaches
zero again before turning positive. So the graph of the derivative should look something
like this. This new blue graph looks like the vertical reflection of the blue graph
above suggesting that the derivative of cosine of x is equal to the negative of sine of x.
So we have graphical evidence that the derivative of sine x is equal to cosine of x, and the
derivative of cosine of x is equal to negative sine of x. For proofs of these facts, please
see the separate proof video for this section. Once we have the derivatives of sine and cosine,
we have the power to compute the derivatives of a lot of other trig functions as well. And notice that a nice way to remember which
of these answers have negative signs in them is that the derivatives of the trig functions
that start with a co And notice that a nice way to remember which
of these answers have negative signs in them is that the derivatives of the trig functions
that start with a co always have a negative, and the root of the
trig functions that don't have the ko are positive. Now let's use these formulas in
an example. g of x is a complicated expression involving several trig functions as well as
a constant m, and I have a couple choices of how to proceed. I could try to rewrite
all my trig functions in terms of sine and cosine and simplify, or I could attack the
derivative directly using the quotient rule. I'm going to use the direct approach In this
case, but sometimes you'll find that rewriting will make things easier. So using the quotient
rule on the denominator, I get the original denominator squared. On the numerator, I get
low D high to compute the derivative of x cosine x, I need the product rule. So I get
x times the derivative of cosine, which is negative sine x, plus the derivative of x,
which is just one times cosine of x. Now I have to do a minus Hi, x cosine of x dillow.
The derivative of M is just zero because M is a constant, plus the derivative of cotangent
which is negative cosecant squared of x. So I found the derivative, I'm going to go ahead
and simplify a little bit by multiplying out then rewriting everything in terms of sine
and cosine, and then multiplying the numerator and denominator by sine squared of x, we have
a somewhat simplified expression for the derivative, you should memorize the derivatives of the
trig functions will prove that the first two formulas are correct in a separate proof video.
In this video, I'll give proofs for the two special trig limit. And I'll also prove that
the derivative of sine is cosine. And the derivative of cosine is minus sign. To prove
that the limit of sine that over theta is one as theta goes to zero, I'm going to start
with a picture. In this picture, I have a unit circle a circle of radius one, and I
have two right triangles, a green triangle and a smaller red triangle, both with angle
theta. Now I'm going to argue in terms of areas, if I want to compute the area of this
sector that I've shaded in blue here, in other words, that pie shaped piece, I can first
compute the area of the circle, which is pi times one squared for the radius. But since
the sector has angle theta, and the full circle has angle two pi, I need to multiply that
area of the circle by the ratio theta over two pi to represent the fraction of the area
of the circle that's included in this sector. So in other words, the area of the sector
is just going to be theta over two, where theta is given in the radians. Now if I want
to compute the area of the little red triangle, I can do one half times the base times the
height. Now the base is going to be equal to cosine theta, because I have a circle of
radius one angle theta here, and the height is going to be sine theta. Finally, the area
of the green triangle is also one half times the base times the height. But now the base
is a full one unit, and the height is given by tangent theta, since opposite, which is
the height here over adjacent, which is one has to equal tangent theta. Now if I put all
those areas together, I know that the area of the red triangle, alright is cosine theta
sine theta over two has to be less than or equal to the area of the blue sector, theta
over two, which is less than or equal to the area of the big green triangle, which is tan
theta over two. Now I'm going to multiply through this inequality by two and rewrite
things in terms of sine and cosine to get cosine theta sine theta is less than or equal
to theta is less than or equal to sine theta over cosine theta. Now I'm going to divide
through my inequalities by sine theta, which won't change the inequalities as long as theta
is greater than zero, so that sine theta is positive. always have a negative, and the root of the
trig functions that don't have the ko are positive. Now let's use these formulas in
an example. g of x is a complicated expression involving several trig functions as well as
a constant m, and I have a couple choices of how to proceed. I could try to rewrite
all my trig functions in terms of sine and cosine and simplify, or I could attack the
derivative directly using the quotient rule. I'm going to use the direct approach In this
case, but sometimes you'll find that rewriting will make things easier. So using the quotient
rule on the denominator, I get the original denominator squared. On the numerator, I get
low D high to compute the derivative of x cosine x, I need the product rule. So I get
x times the derivative of cosine, which is negative sine x, plus the derivative of x,
which is just one times cosine of x. Now I have to do a minus Hi, x cosine of x dillow.
The derivative of M is just zero because M is a constant, plus the derivative of cotangent
which is negative cosecant squared of x. So I found the derivative, I'm going to go ahead
and simplify a little bit by multiplying out then rewriting everything in terms of sine
and cosine, and then multiplying the numerator and denominator by sine squared of x, we have
a somewhat simplified expression for the derivative, you should memorize the derivatives of the
trig functions will prove that the first two formulas are correct in a separate proof video.
In this video, I'll give proofs for the two special trig limit. And I'll also prove that
the derivative of sine is cosine. And the derivative of cosine is minus sign. To prove
that the limit of sine that over theta is one as theta goes to zero, I'm going to start
with a picture. In this picture, I have a unit circle a circle of radius one, and I
have two right triangles, a green triangle and a smaller red triangle, both with angle
theta. Now I'm going to argue in terms of areas, if I want to compute the area of this
sector that I've shaded in blue here, in other words, that pie shaped piece, I can first
compute the area of the circle, which is pi times one squared for the radius. But since
the sector has angle theta, and the full circle has angle two pi, I need to multiply that
area of the circle by the ratio theta over two pi to represent the fraction of the area
of the circle that's included in this sector. So in other words, the area of the sector
is just going to be theta over two, where theta is given in the radians. Now if I want
to compute the area of the little red triangle, I can do one half times the base times the
height. Now the base is going to be equal to cosine theta, because I have a circle of
radius one angle theta here, and the height is going to be sine theta. Finally, the area
of the green triangle is also one half times the base times the height. But now the base
is a full one unit, and the height is given by tangent theta, since opposite, which is
the height here over adjacent, which is one has to equal tangent theta. Now if I put all
those areas together, I know that the area of the red triangle, alright is cosine theta
sine theta over two has to be less than or equal to the area of the blue sector, theta
over two, which is less than or equal to the area of the big green triangle, which is tan
theta over two. Now I'm going to multiply through this inequality by two and rewrite
things in terms of sine and cosine to get cosine theta sine theta is less than or equal
to theta is less than or equal to sine theta over cosine theta. Now I'm going to divide
through my inequalities by sine theta, which won't change the inequalities as long as theta
is greater than zero, so that sine theta is positive. And I get cosine theta is less than or equal
to theta over sine theta is less than or equal to one over cosine theta. Now this middle
expression is the reciprocal of the expression I want to take the limit of. So I'm going
to go ahead and take limits. And since the limits of the two expressions on the outside,
both exist, and equal one by the sandwich theorem, the limit of the expression on the
inside has to exist an equal one as well. Now I've cheated a little bit here. And I've
really just taken the limit from the right because I've assumed that theta is greater
than zero. But you can check that if you say that less than zero, so that sign that as
negative, the limit from the left will also equal one, the inequalities will flip around
first, but you'll still get it use the sandwich theorem to get a limit of one. And that's
a cool geometric proof of this useful limit from calculus. To show that the limit of cosine
theta minus one over theta is zero, we can actually rewrite this expression and reuse
the limit that we just computed. So let me write down my limit. And I'm going to multiply
this expression by cosine theta plus one on the numerator and the denominator. So I haven't
changed the expression, I'm just multiply that by one. Now, if I multiply my numerator
out, And I get cosine theta is less than or equal
to theta over sine theta is less than or equal to one over cosine theta. Now this middle
expression is the reciprocal of the expression I want to take the limit of. So I'm going
to go ahead and take limits. And since the limits of the two expressions on the outside,
both exist, and equal one by the sandwich theorem, the limit of the expression on the
inside has to exist an equal one as well. Now I've cheated a little bit here. And I've
really just taken the limit from the right because I've assumed that theta is greater
than zero. But you can check that if you say that less than zero, so that sign that as
negative, the limit from the left will also equal one, the inequalities will flip around
first, but you'll still get it use the sandwich theorem to get a limit of one. And that's
a cool geometric proof of this useful limit from calculus. To show that the limit of cosine
theta minus one over theta is zero, we can actually rewrite this expression and reuse
the limit that we just computed. So let me write down my limit. And I'm going to multiply
this expression by cosine theta plus one on the numerator and the denominator. So I haven't
changed the expression, I'm just multiply that by one. Now, if I multiply my numerator
out, I get cosine squared theta minus one. And
from the trig identity, sine squared theta plus cosine squared theta equals one, I know
that cosine squared theta minus one has to equal minus sine squared. So I can rewrite
my limit as the limit of minus sine squared theta over theta cosine theta plus one. And
now I can regroup to write my sine theta over theta, and my other copy of sine theta over
cosine theta plus one, the limit of the first expression is going to be negative one, because
of the limit we just proved. And the limit of the second expression is just zero over
one plus one, or zero, and therefore, my entire limit is just going to be negative one times
zero, or zero, which is exactly what we want it to prove. Now we can use these two limits
that we've just proved to calculate the derivatives of sine and cosine, using the limit definition
of derivative and prove the results that were stated previously. According to the limit
definition of derivative, the derivative of sine x is the limit as h goes to zero of sine
of x plus h minus sine of x divided by H. As usual, this is a zero for zero indeterminate
form limits. So I'm going to need to rewrite things to evaluate it. And I'm going to rewrite
using the angle sum formula for sine, the sine of x plus h is equal to sine x cosine
H, cosine plus cosine x sine H. Now if I rearrange things, and factor out a sine x from the first
term, I can break up my limit into pieces and compute every piece. So this is sine x
times zero plus cosine x times one. And so my final answer is cosine x as we wanted the
proof that the derivative of cosine is minus sine is very similar. So please stop the video
and try it for yourself before proceeding. Using the limit definition of derivative,
we have that the derivative of cosine of x is the limit as h goes to zero of cosine of
x plus h minus cosine of x over h, we can rewrite the cosine of x plus h using the angle
sum formula as the cosine of x times the cosine of H minus the sine of x times the sine of
H. And then we still have the minus cosine of x over h. As before, we're going to regroup
things and factoring out the cosine x from the first part, the same familiar limits just
put together in different ways. So here, cosine of x as h goes to zero is just cosine of x.
This limit we know is zero. sine of x is just saying sine of x, and sine of h over h is
going to one which means that our final answer is going to be negative sine of x times one
or just negative sine of x, which is exactly what we wanted. That's all for the proofs
of these four useful calculus facts. rectilinear motion or linear motion means the motion of
an object along a straight line. For example, a particle moving left and right, or a ball
going up and down. In this video, we'll see what the derivative and the second derivative
tell us about the motion of an object constrained to move along a straight line. In this example,
A particle is moving up and down along a straight line. And its position is given by this equation
where the positive positions mean that the particle is above its Baseline Position, whatever
I'm calling position zero, and negative positions mean the particle is below this Baseline Position.
I'm asked to find s prime of T and S double prime of t. So by deriving I get four t cubed
minus 16 t squared plus 12 T for the first derivative, and 12 t squared minus 32 t plus
12. For the second derivative, I get cosine squared theta minus one. And
from the trig identity, sine squared theta plus cosine squared theta equals one, I know
that cosine squared theta minus one has to equal minus sine squared. So I can rewrite
my limit as the limit of minus sine squared theta over theta cosine theta plus one. And
now I can regroup to write my sine theta over theta, and my other copy of sine theta over
cosine theta plus one, the limit of the first expression is going to be negative one, because
of the limit we just proved. And the limit of the second expression is just zero over
one plus one, or zero, and therefore, my entire limit is just going to be negative one times
zero, or zero, which is exactly what we want it to prove. Now we can use these two limits
that we've just proved to calculate the derivatives of sine and cosine, using the limit definition
of derivative and prove the results that were stated previously. According to the limit
definition of derivative, the derivative of sine x is the limit as h goes to zero of sine
of x plus h minus sine of x divided by H. As usual, this is a zero for zero indeterminate
form limits. So I'm going to need to rewrite things to evaluate it. And I'm going to rewrite
using the angle sum formula for sine, the sine of x plus h is equal to sine x cosine
H, cosine plus cosine x sine H. Now if I rearrange things, and factor out a sine x from the first
term, I can break up my limit into pieces and compute every piece. So this is sine x
times zero plus cosine x times one. And so my final answer is cosine x as we wanted the
proof that the derivative of cosine is minus sine is very similar. So please stop the video
and try it for yourself before proceeding. Using the limit definition of derivative,
we have that the derivative of cosine of x is the limit as h goes to zero of cosine of
x plus h minus cosine of x over h, we can rewrite the cosine of x plus h using the angle
sum formula as the cosine of x times the cosine of H minus the sine of x times the sine of
H. And then we still have the minus cosine of x over h. As before, we're going to regroup
things and factoring out the cosine x from the first part, the same familiar limits just
put together in different ways. So here, cosine of x as h goes to zero is just cosine of x.
This limit we know is zero. sine of x is just saying sine of x, and sine of h over h is
going to one which means that our final answer is going to be negative sine of x times one
or just negative sine of x, which is exactly what we wanted. That's all for the proofs
of these four useful calculus facts. rectilinear motion or linear motion means the motion of
an object along a straight line. For example, a particle moving left and right, or a ball
going up and down. In this video, we'll see what the derivative and the second derivative
tell us about the motion of an object constrained to move along a straight line. In this example,
A particle is moving up and down along a straight line. And its position is given by this equation
where the positive positions mean that the particle is above its Baseline Position, whatever
I'm calling position zero, and negative positions mean the particle is below this Baseline Position.
I'm asked to find s prime of T and S double prime of t. So by deriving I get four t cubed
minus 16 t squared plus 12 T for the first derivative, and 12 t squared minus 32 t plus
12. For the second derivative, S prime of t, which can also be written, D
STD represents the instantaneous rate of change of S of t, the position over time, well, the
change in position over time is just the velocity. And this can also be written as v of t, s
double prime of t, the second derivative of s with respect to t, can also be thought of
as the derivative of the velocity function. So that represents the rate of change of velocity
over time, how fast the velocity is increasing or decreasing. And that is called acceleration.
And it can be written as a lefty. Like position, velocity and acceleration can be both positive
and negative. A positive velocity means the position is increasing. So the particle is
moving up, while a negative velocity means the position is decreasing, so the particle
is moving down. Of course, a velocity of zero means the particles at rest, at least for
that instant. from physics, we know that force equals mass times acceleration. So if the
acceleration is positive, then that means the force is in the positive direction, it's
like the particle is being pulled up. If on the other hand, the acceleration is negative
than the force is in the negative direction, and it's like the particle is being pulled
down. an acceleration of zero means there's no force on the particle at that instant,
and the velocity continues as is. Let's use these ideas about velocity acceleration. And
the following table of values to describe the particles motion at time equals 1.5 seconds.
At time 1.5 seconds, the position of the particle is positive, so that means the particle is
above its Baseline Position of zero. its velocity is negative, so that means that its position
is decreasing. In other words, the particle is moving down. Its acceleration is negative
acceleration is the derivative of velocity. So a negative acceleration means the velocity
is decreasing. Well, a negative velocity that's decreasing is getting more and more negative.
So in fact, the particle is moving down faster and faster. This can be a little bit confusing,
because even though the velocity is decreasing, it's getting more and more negative, the speed,
which is the absolute value of velocity is increasing. We can also see what the particle
is doing at 1.5 seconds by looking at this graph, where the time is drawn on the x axis
and position s of t is on the y axis. From the graph, we can see that when t is zero,
S of t is also zero. So the particle starts at its Baseline Position of zero. At time
1.5 seconds, the particle is above this starting position, but moving downwards. And since
the slope of this graph is getting steeper and steeper, we can conclude that the speed
of the particle is increasing. Same thing was we concluded from the table of values.
Now let's do the same analysis when time is 2.5 seconds. s of 2.5 seconds is negative.
So the particle is below its starting position. Velocity s prime of t is also negative. So
the particle is still going down. But now the acceleration as double prime of t is positive.
That means that the velocity Today is increasing, well, a negative velocity that's increasing
is getting less negative closer to zero. So the particle must be slowing down. And in
fact, the speed is decreasing. Again, the graph agrees with this reasoning, at 2.5 seconds,
our position is way down here, our graph is decreasing, so the particles moving down,
and the slope seems to be leveling off. So the particle speed is decreasing. Even though
it's velocity, S prime of t, which can also be written, D
STD represents the instantaneous rate of change of S of t, the position over time, well, the
change in position over time is just the velocity. And this can also be written as v of t, s
double prime of t, the second derivative of s with respect to t, can also be thought of
as the derivative of the velocity function. So that represents the rate of change of velocity
over time, how fast the velocity is increasing or decreasing. And that is called acceleration.
And it can be written as a lefty. Like position, velocity and acceleration can be both positive
and negative. A positive velocity means the position is increasing. So the particle is
moving up, while a negative velocity means the position is decreasing, so the particle
is moving down. Of course, a velocity of zero means the particles at rest, at least for
that instant. from physics, we know that force equals mass times acceleration. So if the
acceleration is positive, then that means the force is in the positive direction, it's
like the particle is being pulled up. If on the other hand, the acceleration is negative
than the force is in the negative direction, and it's like the particle is being pulled
down. an acceleration of zero means there's no force on the particle at that instant,
and the velocity continues as is. Let's use these ideas about velocity acceleration. And
the following table of values to describe the particles motion at time equals 1.5 seconds.
At time 1.5 seconds, the position of the particle is positive, so that means the particle is
above its Baseline Position of zero. its velocity is negative, so that means that its position
is decreasing. In other words, the particle is moving down. Its acceleration is negative
acceleration is the derivative of velocity. So a negative acceleration means the velocity
is decreasing. Well, a negative velocity that's decreasing is getting more and more negative.
So in fact, the particle is moving down faster and faster. This can be a little bit confusing,
because even though the velocity is decreasing, it's getting more and more negative, the speed,
which is the absolute value of velocity is increasing. We can also see what the particle
is doing at 1.5 seconds by looking at this graph, where the time is drawn on the x axis
and position s of t is on the y axis. From the graph, we can see that when t is zero,
S of t is also zero. So the particle starts at its Baseline Position of zero. At time
1.5 seconds, the particle is above this starting position, but moving downwards. And since
the slope of this graph is getting steeper and steeper, we can conclude that the speed
of the particle is increasing. Same thing was we concluded from the table of values.
Now let's do the same analysis when time is 2.5 seconds. s of 2.5 seconds is negative.
So the particle is below its starting position. Velocity s prime of t is also negative. So
the particle is still going down. But now the acceleration as double prime of t is positive.
That means that the velocity Today is increasing, well, a negative velocity that's increasing
is getting less negative closer to zero. So the particle must be slowing down. And in
fact, the speed is decreasing. Again, the graph agrees with this reasoning, at 2.5 seconds,
our position is way down here, our graph is decreasing, so the particles moving down,
and the slope seems to be leveling off. So the particle speed is decreasing. Even though
it's velocity, which you can think of as speed with direction
is increasing, simply because it's a negative velocity that's getting less negative. Notice
that in the first example, when velocity and acceleration are both in the same direction,
that is, they're both negative the particle was speeding up. And the second example, were
velocity and acceleration when the opposite directions one positive one negative, the
particle is slowing down. which you can think of as speed with direction
is increasing, simply because it's a negative velocity that's getting less negative. Notice
that in the first example, when velocity and acceleration are both in the same direction,
that is, they're both negative the particle was speeding up. And the second example, were
velocity and acceleration when the opposite directions one positive one negative, the
particle is slowing down. This is true in general, when velocity acceleration
had the same sign, that as they're both positive or both negative, then the particle is speeding
up. This is true in general, when velocity acceleration
had the same sign, that as they're both positive or both negative, then the particle is speeding
up. And when velocity acceleration have opposite
signs, then the particle is slowing down. One way to think about this is in terms of
force, forces in the same direction as acceleration. So if velocity acceleration have the same
sign, that means force is the same direction as the particles already going, so it's making
the particle speed up. But if velocity and acceleration have opposite signs, then the
force is going against the way that particles moving, so it's causing it to slow down. Let's
continue the same example with some more questions, it'll be helpful to write down the velocity
and acceleration functions that we calculated earlier. I've also graphed position, velocity
and acceleration here at the right. And before you go on, it's a fun exercise to figure out
which one is which, without even looking at the equations just based on the shapes of
the graphs. And where they're increasing where they're decreasing where they're positive
and where they're negative. Velocity is the derivative of position. So velocity needs
to be positive, where position is increasing. The only pairs of functions that have this
property are the blue one, that's positive, when the red ones increasing, and the green
function, which is positive, when the blue one is increasing. Now acceleration, which
is the derivative of velocity also needs to be positive, when velocity is increasing.
So the only way to correctly label the functions with both of these relationships is to make
the red one be position, the blue one be velocity, and the green one be acceleration. This agrees
with the equations that And when velocity acceleration have opposite
signs, then the particle is slowing down. One way to think about this is in terms of
force, forces in the same direction as acceleration. So if velocity acceleration have the same
sign, that means force is the same direction as the particles already going, so it's making
the particle speed up. But if velocity and acceleration have opposite signs, then the
force is going against the way that particles moving, so it's causing it to slow down. Let's
continue the same example with some more questions, it'll be helpful to write down the velocity
and acceleration functions that we calculated earlier. I've also graphed position, velocity
and acceleration here at the right. And before you go on, it's a fun exercise to figure out
which one is which, without even looking at the equations just based on the shapes of
the graphs. And where they're increasing where they're decreasing where they're positive
and where they're negative. Velocity is the derivative of position. So velocity needs
to be positive, where position is increasing. The only pairs of functions that have this
property are the blue one, that's positive, when the red ones increasing, and the green
function, which is positive, when the blue one is increasing. Now acceleration, which
is the derivative of velocity also needs to be positive, when velocity is increasing.
So the only way to correctly label the functions with both of these relationships is to make
the red one be position, the blue one be velocity, and the green one be acceleration. This agrees
with the equations that we have over here. we have over here. The first question asks, When is the particle
at rest, the particle is temporarily at rest when the velocity is zero. In other words,
S prime of t is zero. So plugging in the equation for S prime of t, we can factor out a four
T, and factor some more. To conclude the T has to be 01, or three. The first question asks, When is the particle
at rest, the particle is temporarily at rest when the velocity is zero. In other words,
S prime of t is zero. So plugging in the equation for S prime of t, we can factor out a four
T, and factor some more. To conclude the T has to be 01, or three. This conclusion agrees with our graph of V
of t, which has x intercepts at 01 and three, and also agrees with our graph of position
s of t. Since the particle stops for a moment, it changed direction, when t equals 01. And
three, the particle is moving up when velocity is positive, and moving down when velocity
is negative. Since we know from the previous question, the velocity equals zero, when t
equals 01. And three, we can look in between those values to figure out whether the velocity
is positive or negative, just by plugging in values. So for example, when t is negative
one, if I plug into the negative one to the equation for velocity, I get a negative number.
So velocity must be negative when t is less than zero, between zero and one. If I plug
in, for example, t equals one half, I get a value of S prime of t or V of t of 2.5,
which is a positive number. If I plug in a value of t in between one and three, say t
equals two, I get a value of v of t of negative eight, which is a negative number. And finally,
if I plug in a value of t greater than three, so For, I get a positive answer for V of t.
So from the sign chart, I see that V of t is negative when t is between negative infinity
and zero, and in between one and three, and V of t is positive when t is between This conclusion agrees with our graph of V
of t, which has x intercepts at 01 and three, and also agrees with our graph of position
s of t. Since the particle stops for a moment, it changed direction, when t equals 01. And
three, the particle is moving up when velocity is positive, and moving down when velocity
is negative. Since we know from the previous question, the velocity equals zero, when t
equals 01. And three, we can look in between those values to figure out whether the velocity
is positive or negative, just by plugging in values. So for example, when t is negative
one, if I plug into the negative one to the equation for velocity, I get a negative number.
So velocity must be negative when t is less than zero, between zero and one. If I plug
in, for example, t equals one half, I get a value of S prime of t or V of t of 2.5,
which is a positive number. If I plug in a value of t in between one and three, say t
equals two, I get a value of v of t of negative eight, which is a negative number. And finally,
if I plug in a value of t greater than three, so For, I get a positive answer for V of t.
So from the sign chart, I see that V of t is negative when t is between negative infinity
and zero, and in between one and three, and V of t is positive when t is between zero and zero and one, and between three and infinity. Of course,
I could have reached the same conclusion just by looking at the graph of velocity and where
it's above and below the x axis, or even by looking at the graph of position and seeing
where it's increasing and where it's decreasing. To answer the next question, the particle
will be speeding up when V of t and a of t are both positive or both negative. And the
particle will be slowing down when V of t and a of t have opposite signs. So let's make
a similar sign chart to figure out where a of t is positive and negative. First, it'll
be helpful to find out where a if t is zero. So if I set zero equal to my S double prime,
that's 12 t squared minus 32 t plus 12, I could factor out one, and between three and infinity. Of course,
I could have reached the same conclusion just by looking at the graph of velocity and where
it's above and below the x axis, or even by looking at the graph of position and seeing
where it's increasing and where it's decreasing. To answer the next question, the particle
will be speeding up when V of t and a of t are both positive or both negative. And the
particle will be slowing down when V of t and a of t have opposite signs. So let's make
a similar sign chart to figure out where a of t is positive and negative. First, it'll
be helpful to find out where a if t is zero. So if I set zero equal to my S double prime,
that's 12 t squared minus 32 t plus 12, I could factor out a four a four and then use the quadratic equation to find
the solution. Since this equation doesn't factor easily, this simplifies to four thirds
plus or minus the square root of seven over three, which is approximately 0.45, and 2.22.
Now I can build a similar sign chart for acceleration, mark the places where acceleration is zero.
and plug in values of t, say t equals zero is the equation for acceleration, I get a
positive answer here. When I plug in, say t equals one, I get a negative answer here.
And when I plug in, say, t equals three, I get another positive answer here. Now, if
I put this together with my velocity chart, which changed sign at 01, and three, and went
from negative to positive, to negative to positive, I can try to figure out where velocity
acceleration both have the same sign. It might be helpful actually to shade in where acceleration
is positive. And separately shade in where velocity is positive. And then look for the
places where both are shaded. So between zero and 4.5, and greater than three. And then
I can also look where both are unshaded that looks like in between one and 2.22. So that's
where they're both negative. And then I'll know that V of t and a of t have opposite
signs everywhere else. A slightly better answer, we'll use exact values of four thirds plus
or minus squared of seven thirds instead of these decimal approximations. So let me write
that down. So here is where the particle speeding up. And here, it's where it's slowing down,
we can check our work by looking at the graph of position, the particle speeding up with
the position graph is getting steeper and steeper, that's the red graph is getting steeper
and steeper here, here. And here, just like we found algebraically. As our final example,
let's look at net change in position and distance traveled between one and four seconds for
the same particle. At time, one second position is five thirds, or about 1.67 millimeters
at time for its position is given by 32 thirds, or about 10.67 millimeters, all I'm doing
is plugging one and four into this equation. So the net change in position is just the
difference of these two numbers. As a four minus as of one, which is nine millimeters.
At first glance, it might seem like the total distance traveled between one and four seconds
should also be nine millimeters, but actually, it's a little more complicated. Because the
particle switches direction during that time period, it doesn't go straight from its position
at one second to its position at four seconds. Remember what the graph Position looked like
the particle switches direction at one second and at three seconds. So to find the total
distance, we need the distance of travels from one second to three seconds, plus the
distance that travels from three seconds to four seconds. Another way of thinking about
this is that we need the absolute value of s three minus s one, plus the absolute value
of s four minus s three, we need these absolute value signs because this difference in position
will be negative instead of positive when the particles moving down. Plugging in the
t values into our equation, we get negative 27 minus five thirds, plus the absolute value
of 32 thirds minus negative 27, which is a total of 199 thirds, or 66.3 repeating millimeters,
quite a bit more than the nine millimeter difference in position. This video gave an
in depth analysis of a particle moving up and down along a straight and then use the quadratic equation to find
the solution. Since this equation doesn't factor easily, this simplifies to four thirds
plus or minus the square root of seven over three, which is approximately 0.45, and 2.22.
Now I can build a similar sign chart for acceleration, mark the places where acceleration is zero.
and plug in values of t, say t equals zero is the equation for acceleration, I get a
positive answer here. When I plug in, say t equals one, I get a negative answer here.
And when I plug in, say, t equals three, I get another positive answer here. Now, if
I put this together with my velocity chart, which changed sign at 01, and three, and went
from negative to positive, to negative to positive, I can try to figure out where velocity
acceleration both have the same sign. It might be helpful actually to shade in where acceleration
is positive. And separately shade in where velocity is positive. And then look for the
places where both are shaded. So between zero and 4.5, and greater than three. And then
I can also look where both are unshaded that looks like in between one and 2.22. So that's
where they're both negative. And then I'll know that V of t and a of t have opposite
signs everywhere else. A slightly better answer, we'll use exact values of four thirds plus
or minus squared of seven thirds instead of these decimal approximations. So let me write
that down. So here is where the particle speeding up. And here, it's where it's slowing down,
we can check our work by looking at the graph of position, the particle speeding up with
the position graph is getting steeper and steeper, that's the red graph is getting steeper
and steeper here, here. And here, just like we found algebraically. As our final example,
let's look at net change in position and distance traveled between one and four seconds for
the same particle. At time, one second position is five thirds, or about 1.67 millimeters
at time for its position is given by 32 thirds, or about 10.67 millimeters, all I'm doing
is plugging one and four into this equation. So the net change in position is just the
difference of these two numbers. As a four minus as of one, which is nine millimeters.
At first glance, it might seem like the total distance traveled between one and four seconds
should also be nine millimeters, but actually, it's a little more complicated. Because the
particle switches direction during that time period, it doesn't go straight from its position
at one second to its position at four seconds. Remember what the graph Position looked like
the particle switches direction at one second and at three seconds. So to find the total
distance, we need the distance of travels from one second to three seconds, plus the
distance that travels from three seconds to four seconds. Another way of thinking about
this is that we need the absolute value of s three minus s one, plus the absolute value
of s four minus s three, we need these absolute value signs because this difference in position
will be negative instead of positive when the particles moving down. Plugging in the
t values into our equation, we get negative 27 minus five thirds, plus the absolute value
of 32 thirds minus negative 27, which is a total of 199 thirds, or 66.3 repeating millimeters,
quite a bit more than the nine millimeter difference in position. This video gave an
in depth analysis of a particle moving up and down along a straight line. line. A similar analysis could be done for a particle
moving left and right along a straight line, where a positive position means the particles
on the right side, and a negative position means the particles on the left side of his
Baseline Position. Of course, the same analysis can be done for other objects, not just particles.
A typical application is to a ball being thrown straight up and then falling down again. This
video will give an economic application of the derivative to a cost function. Suppose
that the total cost of producing x tie dyed t shirts is C of x. A similar analysis could be done for a particle
moving left and right along a straight line, where a positive position means the particles
on the right side, and a negative position means the particles on the left side of his
Baseline Position. Of course, the same analysis can be done for other objects, not just particles.
A typical application is to a ball being thrown straight up and then falling down again. This
video will give an economic application of the derivative to a cost function. Suppose
that the total cost of producing x tie dyed t shirts is C of x. I'm going to sketch a few graphs, and you
try to decide which graph is the most reasonable representation for C of x. Pause the video
for a moment to think about it. All of these candidate graphs that I've drawn have a nonzero
y intercept, that's meant to reflect the idea that there's some fixed startup cost and buying
equipment before you can even get started. Now, I would like to suggest that C of x should
be an increasing function of x, because it's going to cost more money to make more t shirts,
you need more supplies and labor. So this function is out. Now it's somewhat reasonable,
I think that C of x might be a linear function of x like it is here, if you've got the same
cost per t shirt, whether you make 10 t shirts, or 1000 t shirts, the slope in that case would
represent the cost per t shirt. And the linear function would mean that cost per t shirt
is constant, no matter how many t shirts you're making. But in reality, it's probably going
to be cheaper to make 1000 t shirts than it is to make just a few t shirts. And therefore
the cost per t shirt, sure slope should be going down as x increases. So this function
right here is the one whose slope is going down for larger access. And so I would say
that this is the most reasonable representation for C of x as a function of x. In other words,
C of x should be an increasing function, but C prime of x should be decreasing. C of 204
minus C of 200 represents the additional cost for making 204 t shirts instead of 200. In
formula, you might think of that as the cost of making the last four t shirts. The ratio
C of 200 for a minus C of 200 over four is the average rate of change of C of x. The
units are units of cost, which is probably dollars per t shirt. And formula you might
think of this as the additional cost per t shirt of making the last four t shirts. C
prime of 200 is the instantaneous rate of change of C of x. c of x is known as the cost
function. And C prime of x is called the marginal cost, which is the rate at which cost is increasing
per additional t shirt made. It might seem a little bit weird to take the derivative
of C of x since x can really only take on integer values. But we can always approximate
C of x with a function whose domain is all real numbers. To make this a little more specific,
let's use a cost function of C of x equals 500 plus 300 times the square root of x. In
this example, x is supposed to be the number of iPads that are produced, and C of x is
the cost of producing them in dollars. Then C of 401 minus C of 400. given by 500 plus
300, times the square root of 401 minus 500 plus 300 times the square root of 400. This
simplifies to $7.50, rounded to the nearest cent. This means that it costs an additional
$7.50 to go from producing 400 iPads to 401 iPad. In this fictitious example, I'm going to sketch a few graphs, and you
try to decide which graph is the most reasonable representation for C of x. Pause the video
for a moment to think about it. All of these candidate graphs that I've drawn have a nonzero
y intercept, that's meant to reflect the idea that there's some fixed startup cost and buying
equipment before you can even get started. Now, I would like to suggest that C of x should
be an increasing function of x, because it's going to cost more money to make more t shirts,
you need more supplies and labor. So this function is out. Now it's somewhat reasonable,
I think that C of x might be a linear function of x like it is here, if you've got the same
cost per t shirt, whether you make 10 t shirts, or 1000 t shirts, the slope in that case would
represent the cost per t shirt. And the linear function would mean that cost per t shirt
is constant, no matter how many t shirts you're making. But in reality, it's probably going
to be cheaper to make 1000 t shirts than it is to make just a few t shirts. And therefore
the cost per t shirt, sure slope should be going down as x increases. So this function
right here is the one whose slope is going down for larger access. And so I would say
that this is the most reasonable representation for C of x as a function of x. In other words,
C of x should be an increasing function, but C prime of x should be decreasing. C of 204
minus C of 200 represents the additional cost for making 204 t shirts instead of 200. In
formula, you might think of that as the cost of making the last four t shirts. The ratio
C of 200 for a minus C of 200 over four is the average rate of change of C of x. The
units are units of cost, which is probably dollars per t shirt. And formula you might
think of this as the additional cost per t shirt of making the last four t shirts. C
prime of 200 is the instantaneous rate of change of C of x. c of x is known as the cost
function. And C prime of x is called the marginal cost, which is the rate at which cost is increasing
per additional t shirt made. It might seem a little bit weird to take the derivative
of C of x since x can really only take on integer values. But we can always approximate
C of x with a function whose domain is all real numbers. To make this a little more specific,
let's use a cost function of C of x equals 500 plus 300 times the square root of x. In
this example, x is supposed to be the number of iPads that are produced, and C of x is
the cost of producing them in dollars. Then C of 401 minus C of 400. given by 500 plus
300, times the square root of 401 minus 500 plus 300 times the square root of 400. This
simplifies to $7.50, rounded to the nearest cent. This means that it costs an additional
$7.50 to go from producing 400 iPads to 401 iPad. In this fictitious example, if I want to compute C prime of 400, instead,
I can see that C prime of x is equal to 300 times one half x to the minus one half. So
C prime of 400 is going to be 300 times one half times 400 to the negative one half, which
simplifies to 300 over two times the square root of 400, which is also 7.5, or $7.50.
Per iPad. Up to rounding to the nearest cent, these two answers are equal. And it makes
sense that C prime of 400 should equal approximately this difference. Since C prime of 400, the
derivative is approximately equal to the average rate of change going from 400 to 401, which
is just this difference, divided by one. Once again, C prime of 400 is called the marginal
cost, and represents the rate at which the cost function is increasing with each additional
item. This video gave an example of the cost function, and it's derivative, which is known
as marginal cost. This video introduces logarithms. logarithms are a way of writing exponents.
The expression log base a of B equals c means that a to the C equals b. In other words,
log base a of B is the exponent that you raise a to to get be. The number A is called the
base of the logarithm. It's also called the base when we write it in this exponential
form. Some students find it helpful to remember this relationship, log base a of B equals
c means a to the C equals b, by drawing arrows, if I want to compute C prime of 400, instead,
I can see that C prime of x is equal to 300 times one half x to the minus one half. So
C prime of 400 is going to be 300 times one half times 400 to the negative one half, which
simplifies to 300 over two times the square root of 400, which is also 7.5, or $7.50.
Per iPad. Up to rounding to the nearest cent, these two answers are equal. And it makes
sense that C prime of 400 should equal approximately this difference. Since C prime of 400, the
derivative is approximately equal to the average rate of change going from 400 to 401, which
is just this difference, divided by one. Once again, C prime of 400 is called the marginal
cost, and represents the rate at which the cost function is increasing with each additional
item. This video gave an example of the cost function, and it's derivative, which is known
as marginal cost. This video introduces logarithms. logarithms are a way of writing exponents.
The expression log base a of B equals c means that a to the C equals b. In other words,
log base a of B is the exponent that you raise a to to get be. The number A is called the
base of the logarithm. It's also called the base when we write it in this exponential
form. Some students find it helpful to remember this relationship, log base a of B equals
c means a to the C equals b, by drawing arrows, a to the C equals b. a to the C equals b. Other students like to think of it in terms
of asking a question, log base a of fee, asks, What power do you raise a two in order to
get b? Let's look at some examples. log base two of eight is three, because two to the
three equals eight. In general, log base two of y is asking you the question, What power
do you have to raise to two to get y? So for example, log base two of 16 is four, because
it's asking you the question to two what power equals 16? And the answer is four. Please
pause the video and try some of these other examples. log base two of two is asking, What
power do you raise to two to get to? And the answer is one. Two to the one equals two.
log base two of one half is asking two to what power gives you one half? Well, to get
one half, you need to raise two to a negative power. So that would be two to the negative
one. So the answer is negative one. log base two of 1/8 means what power do we raise to
two in order to get 1/8. Since one eight is one over two cubed, we have to raise two to
the negative three power to get one over two cubed. So our exponent is negative three,
and that's our answer to our log expression. Finally, log base two of one is asking to
to what power equals one, or anything raised to the zero power gives us one, so this log
expression evaluates to zero. Notice that we can get positive negative and zero answers
for our logarithm expressions. Please pause the video and figure out what these logs evaluate
to to work out log base 10 of another Again, notice that a million is 10 to the sixth power.
Now we're asking the question, What power do we raise tend to to get a million? So that
is what power do we raise 10? to to get 10 to the six? Well, of course, the answer is
going to be six. Similarly, since point O one is 10 to the minus three, this log expressions,
the same thing as asking, what's the log base 10 of 10 to the minus three? Well, what power
do you have to raise 10? to to get 10 to the minus three? Of course, the answer is negative
three. Log base 10 of zero is asking, What power do we raise 10 to to get zero. If you
think about it, there's no way to raise 10 to an exponent get zero. Raising 10 to a positive
exponent gets us really big positive numbers. Raising 10 to a negative exponent is like
one over 10 to a power that's giving us tiny fractions, but they're still positive numbers,
we're never going to get zero. Even if we raised 10 to the zero power, we'll just get
one. So there's no way to get zero and the log base 10 of zero does not exist. If you
try it on your calculator using the log base 10 button, you'll get an error message. Same
thing happens when we do log base 10 of negative 100. We're asking 10 to what power equals
negative 100. And there's no exponent that will work. And more generally, it's possible
to take the log of numbers that are greater than zero, but not for numbers that are less
than or equal to zero. In other words, the domain of the function log base a of x, no
matter what base you're using, for a, the domain is going to be all positive numbers.
A few notes on notation. When you see ln of x, that's called natural log, and it means
the log base e of x, where he is that famous number that's about 2.718. When you see log
of x with no base at all, by convention, that means log base 10 of x, and it's called the
common log. Most scientific calculators have buttons for natural log, and for common log.
Let's practice rewriting expressions with logs in them. log base three of one nine is
negative two can be rewritten as the expression three to the negative two equals 1/9. Log
of 13 is shorthand for log base 10 of 13. So that can be rewritten as 10 to the 1.11394
equals 13. Finally, in this last expression, ln means natural log, or log base e, so I
can rewrite this equation as log base e of whenever E equals negative one. Well, that
means the same thing as e to the negative one equals one over e, which is true. Now
let's go the opposite direction. We'll start with exponential equations and rewrite them
as logs. Remember that log base a of B equals c means the same thing Other students like to think of it in terms
of asking a question, log base a of fee, asks, What power do you raise a two in order to
get b? Let's look at some examples. log base two of eight is three, because two to the
three equals eight. In general, log base two of y is asking you the question, What power
do you have to raise to two to get y? So for example, log base two of 16 is four, because
it's asking you the question to two what power equals 16? And the answer is four. Please
pause the video and try some of these other examples. log base two of two is asking, What
power do you raise to two to get to? And the answer is one. Two to the one equals two.
log base two of one half is asking two to what power gives you one half? Well, to get
one half, you need to raise two to a negative power. So that would be two to the negative
one. So the answer is negative one. log base two of 1/8 means what power do we raise to
two in order to get 1/8. Since one eight is one over two cubed, we have to raise two to
the negative three power to get one over two cubed. So our exponent is negative three,
and that's our answer to our log expression. Finally, log base two of one is asking to
to what power equals one, or anything raised to the zero power gives us one, so this log
expression evaluates to zero. Notice that we can get positive negative and zero answers
for our logarithm expressions. Please pause the video and figure out what these logs evaluate
to to work out log base 10 of another Again, notice that a million is 10 to the sixth power.
Now we're asking the question, What power do we raise tend to to get a million? So that
is what power do we raise 10? to to get 10 to the six? Well, of course, the answer is
going to be six. Similarly, since point O one is 10 to the minus three, this log expressions,
the same thing as asking, what's the log base 10 of 10 to the minus three? Well, what power
do you have to raise 10? to to get 10 to the minus three? Of course, the answer is negative
three. Log base 10 of zero is asking, What power do we raise 10 to to get zero. If you
think about it, there's no way to raise 10 to an exponent get zero. Raising 10 to a positive
exponent gets us really big positive numbers. Raising 10 to a negative exponent is like
one over 10 to a power that's giving us tiny fractions, but they're still positive numbers,
we're never going to get zero. Even if we raised 10 to the zero power, we'll just get
one. So there's no way to get zero and the log base 10 of zero does not exist. If you
try it on your calculator using the log base 10 button, you'll get an error message. Same
thing happens when we do log base 10 of negative 100. We're asking 10 to what power equals
negative 100. And there's no exponent that will work. And more generally, it's possible
to take the log of numbers that are greater than zero, but not for numbers that are less
than or equal to zero. In other words, the domain of the function log base a of x, no
matter what base you're using, for a, the domain is going to be all positive numbers.
A few notes on notation. When you see ln of x, that's called natural log, and it means
the log base e of x, where he is that famous number that's about 2.718. When you see log
of x with no base at all, by convention, that means log base 10 of x, and it's called the
common log. Most scientific calculators have buttons for natural log, and for common log.
Let's practice rewriting expressions with logs in them. log base three of one nine is
negative two can be rewritten as the expression three to the negative two equals 1/9. Log
of 13 is shorthand for log base 10 of 13. So that can be rewritten as 10 to the 1.11394
equals 13. Finally, in this last expression, ln means natural log, or log base e, so I
can rewrite this equation as log base e of whenever E equals negative one. Well, that
means the same thing as e to the negative one equals one over e, which is true. Now
let's go the opposite direction. We'll start with exponential equations and rewrite them
as logs. Remember that log base a of B equals c means the same thing as a to the C equals b, as a to the C equals b, the base stays the same in both expressions.
So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation, that's going to
be the same as the base in our log. Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument
of the log. And what goes on the other side of the equal sign. Remember that the answer
to a log is an exponent. So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for
my exponential equation. In other words, you and I'll put the 9.78 as the argument of my
log. This works because log base three of 9.78 equals u means the same thing as three
to the U equals 9.78, which is just what we started with. In the second example, the base
of my exponential equation is E. So the base of my log is going to be the answer to my
log is an exponent. In this case, the exponent 3x plus seven. And the other expression, the
four minus y becomes my argument of my log. Let me check, log base e of four minus y equals
3x plus seven means e to 3x plus seven equals four minus Y, which is just what I started
with. I can also rewrite log base e as natural log. This video introduced the idea of logs.
And the fact that log base a of B equal c means the same thing as a to the C equals
b. So log base a of B is asking you the question, What power exponent Do you raise a to in order
to get b. In this video, we'll work out the graph, so some log functions and also talk
about their domains. For this first example, let's graph a log function by hand by plotting
some points. The function we're working with is y equals log base two of x, I'll make a
chart of x and y values. Since we're working this out by hand, I want to pick x values
for which it's easy to compute log base two of x. So I'll start out with the x value of
one. Because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is 02 is another
x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking, What power do I raise
to two to get to one? And the answer is one. Power other powers of two are easy to work
with. So for example, log base two of four that saying what power do I raise to to to
get four, so the answer is two. Similarly, log base two of eight is three, and log base
two of 16 is four. Let me also work with some fractional values for X. If x is one half,
then log base two of one half that saying what power do I raise to two to get one half?
Well, that needs a power of negative one. It's also easy to compute by hand, the log
base two of 1/4 and 1/8. log base two of 1/4 is negative two, since two to the negative
two is 1/4. And similarly, log base two of 1/8 is negative three. I'll put some tick
marks on my x and y axes. Please pause the video and take a moment to plot these points.
Let's see I have the point, one, zero, that's here to one that's here, for two, that is
here. And then eight, three, which is the base stays the same in both expressions.
So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation, that's going to
be the same as the base in our log. Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument
of the log. And what goes on the other side of the equal sign. Remember that the answer
to a log is an exponent. So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for
my exponential equation. In other words, you and I'll put the 9.78 as the argument of my
log. This works because log base three of 9.78 equals u means the same thing as three
to the U equals 9.78, which is just what we started with. In the second example, the base
of my exponential equation is E. So the base of my log is going to be the answer to my
log is an exponent. In this case, the exponent 3x plus seven. And the other expression, the
four minus y becomes my argument of my log. Let me check, log base e of four minus y equals
3x plus seven means e to 3x plus seven equals four minus Y, which is just what I started
with. I can also rewrite log base e as natural log. This video introduced the idea of logs.
And the fact that log base a of B equal c means the same thing as a to the C equals
b. So log base a of B is asking you the question, What power exponent Do you raise a to in order
to get b. In this video, we'll work out the graph, so some log functions and also talk
about their domains. For this first example, let's graph a log function by hand by plotting
some points. The function we're working with is y equals log base two of x, I'll make a
chart of x and y values. Since we're working this out by hand, I want to pick x values
for which it's easy to compute log base two of x. So I'll start out with the x value of
one. Because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is 02 is another
x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking, What power do I raise
to two to get to one? And the answer is one. Power other powers of two are easy to work
with. So for example, log base two of four that saying what power do I raise to to to
get four, so the answer is two. Similarly, log base two of eight is three, and log base
two of 16 is four. Let me also work with some fractional values for X. If x is one half,
then log base two of one half that saying what power do I raise to two to get one half?
Well, that needs a power of negative one. It's also easy to compute by hand, the log
base two of 1/4 and 1/8. log base two of 1/4 is negative two, since two to the negative
two is 1/4. And similarly, log base two of 1/8 is negative three. I'll put some tick
marks on my x and y axes. Please pause the video and take a moment to plot these points.
Let's see I have the point, one, zero, that's here to one that's here, for two, that is
here. And then eight, three, which is here. here. And the fractional x values, one half goes
with negative one, and 1/4 with negative two 1/8 with negative three. And the fractional x values, one half goes
with negative one, and 1/4 with negative two 1/8 with negative three. And if I connect the dots, I get a graph that
looks something like this. If I had smaller and smaller fractions, I would keep getting
more and more negative answers when I took log base two of them, so my graph is getting
more and more negative, my y values are getting more and more negative as x is getting close
to zero. Now I didn't draw any parts of the graph over here with negative X values, I
didn't put any negative X values on my chart. That omission is no accident. Because if you
try to take the log base two or base anything of a negative number, like say negative four
or something, there's no answer. This doesn't exist because there's no power that you can
raise to two to get a negative number. So there are no points on the graph for negative
X values. And similarly, there are no points on the graph where x is zero, because you
can't take log base two of zero, there's no power you can raise to to to get zero. I want
to observe some key features of this graph. First of all, the domain is x values greater
than zero. In interval notation, I can write that as a round bracket because I don't want
to include zero to infinity, the range is going to be the y values, while they go all
the way down into the far reaches of the negative numbers. And the graph gradually increases
y value is getting bigger and bigger. So the range is actually all real numbers are an
interval notation negative infinity to infinity. Finally, I want to point out that this graph
has a vertical asymptote at the y axis, that is at the line x equals zero. I'll draw that
on my graph with a dotted line. A vertical asymptote is a line that our functions graph
gets closer and closer to so this is The graph of y equals log base two of x. But if I wanted
to graph say, y equals log base 10 of x, it would look very similar, it would still have
a domain of X values greater than zero, a range of all real numbers and a vertical asymptote
at the y axis, it would still go through the point one zero, but it would go through the
point 10. One instead, because log base 10 of 10 is one, it would look pretty much the
same, just a lot flatter over here. But even though it doesn't look like it with the way
I've drawn it, it still gradually goes up to n towards infinity. In fact, the graph
of y equals log base neaa of X for a bigger than one looks pretty much the same, and has
the same three properties. Now that we know what the basic log graph looks like, we can
plot at least rough graphs of other log functions without plotting points. Here we have the
graph of natural log of X plus five. And again, I'm just going to draw a rough graph. If I
did want to do a more accurate graph, I probably would want to plot some points. But I know
that roughly a log graph, if it was just like y equals ln of x, that would look something
like this, and it would go through the point one zero, And if I connect the dots, I get a graph that
looks something like this. If I had smaller and smaller fractions, I would keep getting
more and more negative answers when I took log base two of them, so my graph is getting
more and more negative, my y values are getting more and more negative as x is getting close
to zero. Now I didn't draw any parts of the graph over here with negative X values, I
didn't put any negative X values on my chart. That omission is no accident. Because if you
try to take the log base two or base anything of a negative number, like say negative four
or something, there's no answer. This doesn't exist because there's no power that you can
raise to two to get a negative number. So there are no points on the graph for negative
X values. And similarly, there are no points on the graph where x is zero, because you
can't take log base two of zero, there's no power you can raise to to to get zero. I want
to observe some key features of this graph. First of all, the domain is x values greater
than zero. In interval notation, I can write that as a round bracket because I don't want
to include zero to infinity, the range is going to be the y values, while they go all
the way down into the far reaches of the negative numbers. And the graph gradually increases
y value is getting bigger and bigger. So the range is actually all real numbers are an
interval notation negative infinity to infinity. Finally, I want to point out that this graph
has a vertical asymptote at the y axis, that is at the line x equals zero. I'll draw that
on my graph with a dotted line. A vertical asymptote is a line that our functions graph
gets closer and closer to so this is The graph of y equals log base two of x. But if I wanted
to graph say, y equals log base 10 of x, it would look very similar, it would still have
a domain of X values greater than zero, a range of all real numbers and a vertical asymptote
at the y axis, it would still go through the point one zero, but it would go through the
point 10. One instead, because log base 10 of 10 is one, it would look pretty much the
same, just a lot flatter over here. But even though it doesn't look like it with the way
I've drawn it, it still gradually goes up to n towards infinity. In fact, the graph
of y equals log base neaa of X for a bigger than one looks pretty much the same, and has
the same three properties. Now that we know what the basic log graph looks like, we can
plot at least rough graphs of other log functions without plotting points. Here we have the
graph of natural log of X plus five. And again, I'm just going to draw a rough graph. If I
did want to do a more accurate graph, I probably would want to plot some points. But I know
that roughly a log graph, if it was just like y equals ln of x, that would look something
like this, and it would go through the point one zero, with a vertical asymptote along the y axis.
Now if I want to graph ln of x plus five, that just shifts our graph by five units,
it'll still have the same vertical asymptote, since the vertical line shifted up by five
units is still a vertical line. But instead of going through one zero, it'll go through
the point, one, five. So I'll draw a rough sketch here. Let's compare our starting function
y equals ln x, and the transformed version y equals ln x plus five in terms of the domain,
the range and the vertical asymptote. Our original function y equals ln x had a domain
of zero to infinity. Since adding five on the outside affects the y values, and the
domain is the x values, this transformation doesn't change the domain. So the domain is
still from zero to infinity. Now the range of our original y equals ln x was from negative
infinity to infinity. Shifting up by five does affect the y values, and the range is
talking about the y values. But since the original range was all real numbers, if you
add five to all set of all real numbers, you still get the set of all real numbers. So
in this case, the range doesn't change either. And finally, we already saw that the original
vertical asymptote of the y axis x equals zero, when we shift that up by five units,
it's still the vertical line x equals zero. In this next example, we're starting with
a log base 10 function. And since the plus two is on the inside, that means we shift
that graph left by two. So I'll draw our basic log function. Here's our basic log function.
So I'll think of that as y equals log of x going through the point one, zero, here's
its vertical asymptote. Now I need to shift everything left by two. So my vertical asymptote
shifts left, and now it's at the line x equals negative two, instead of at x equals zero,
and my graph, let's see my point, one zero gets shifted to, let's see negative one zero,
since I'm subtracting two from the axis, and here's a rough sketch of the resulting graph.
Let's compare the features of the two graphs drawn here. We're talking about domains, the
original kind of domain of from zero to infinity. But now I've shifted that left. So I subtracted
two from all my exercises. And here's my new domain, which I can also verify just by looking
at the picture. My range was originally from negative infinity to infinity. Well, shifting
left only affects the x value, so it doesn't even affect the range. So my range is still
negative infinity to infinity. My vertical asymptote was originally at x equals zero.
And since I subtract two from all my x values, that shifts that to x equals negative two.
In this last problem, I'm not going to worry about drawing this graph. I'll just use algebra
to compute its domain. So let's think about What's the issue, when you're taking the logs
of things? Well, you can't take the log of a negative number or zero. So whatever is
inside the argument of the log function, whatever is being fed into log had better be greater
than zero. So I'll write that down, we need to minus 3x, to be greater than zero. Now
it's a matter of solving an inequality. Two has got to be greater than 3x. So two thirds
is greater than x. In other words, x has to be less than two thirds. So our domain is
all the x values from negative infinity to two thirds, not including two thirds, it's
a good idea to memorize the basic shape of the graph of a log function. It looks something
like this, go through the point one zero, and has a vertical asymptote on the y axis.
Also, if you remember that you can't take the log of a negative number, or zero, then
that helps you quickly compute domains for log functions. Whatever's inside the log function,
you set that greater than zero, and solve. This video is about combining logs and exponents.
Please pause the video and take a moment to use your calculator to evaluate the following
four expressions. with a vertical asymptote along the y axis.
Now if I want to graph ln of x plus five, that just shifts our graph by five units,
it'll still have the same vertical asymptote, since the vertical line shifted up by five
units is still a vertical line. But instead of going through one zero, it'll go through
the point, one, five. So I'll draw a rough sketch here. Let's compare our starting function
y equals ln x, and the transformed version y equals ln x plus five in terms of the domain,
the range and the vertical asymptote. Our original function y equals ln x had a domain
of zero to infinity. Since adding five on the outside affects the y values, and the
domain is the x values, this transformation doesn't change the domain. So the domain is
still from zero to infinity. Now the range of our original y equals ln x was from negative
infinity to infinity. Shifting up by five does affect the y values, and the range is
talking about the y values. But since the original range was all real numbers, if you
add five to all set of all real numbers, you still get the set of all real numbers. So
in this case, the range doesn't change either. And finally, we already saw that the original
vertical asymptote of the y axis x equals zero, when we shift that up by five units,
it's still the vertical line x equals zero. In this next example, we're starting with
a log base 10 function. And since the plus two is on the inside, that means we shift
that graph left by two. So I'll draw our basic log function. Here's our basic log function.
So I'll think of that as y equals log of x going through the point one, zero, here's
its vertical asymptote. Now I need to shift everything left by two. So my vertical asymptote
shifts left, and now it's at the line x equals negative two, instead of at x equals zero,
and my graph, let's see my point, one zero gets shifted to, let's see negative one zero,
since I'm subtracting two from the axis, and here's a rough sketch of the resulting graph.
Let's compare the features of the two graphs drawn here. We're talking about domains, the
original kind of domain of from zero to infinity. But now I've shifted that left. So I subtracted
two from all my exercises. And here's my new domain, which I can also verify just by looking
at the picture. My range was originally from negative infinity to infinity. Well, shifting
left only affects the x value, so it doesn't even affect the range. So my range is still
negative infinity to infinity. My vertical asymptote was originally at x equals zero.
And since I subtract two from all my x values, that shifts that to x equals negative two.
In this last problem, I'm not going to worry about drawing this graph. I'll just use algebra
to compute its domain. So let's think about What's the issue, when you're taking the logs
of things? Well, you can't take the log of a negative number or zero. So whatever is
inside the argument of the log function, whatever is being fed into log had better be greater
than zero. So I'll write that down, we need to minus 3x, to be greater than zero. Now
it's a matter of solving an inequality. Two has got to be greater than 3x. So two thirds
is greater than x. In other words, x has to be less than two thirds. So our domain is
all the x values from negative infinity to two thirds, not including two thirds, it's
a good idea to memorize the basic shape of the graph of a log function. It looks something
like this, go through the point one zero, and has a vertical asymptote on the y axis.
Also, if you remember that you can't take the log of a negative number, or zero, then
that helps you quickly compute domains for log functions. Whatever's inside the log function,
you set that greater than zero, and solve. This video is about combining logs and exponents.
Please pause the video and take a moment to use your calculator to evaluate the following
four expressions. Remember, that log base 10 on your calculator
is the log button. While log base e on your calculator is the natural log button, you
should find that the log base 10 of 10 cubed is three, the log base e of e to the 4.2 is
4.2 10 to the log base 10 of 1000 is 1000. And eat the log base e of 9.6 is 9.6. In each
case, the log and the exponential function with the same base undo each other, and we're
left with the exponent. In fact, it's true that for any base a the log base a of a to
the x is equal to x. The same sort of cancellation happens if we do the exponential function
in the log function with the same base in the opposite order. For example, we take 10
to the power of log base 10 of 1000, the 10 to the power and the log base 10 undo each
other, and we're left with the 1000s. This happens for any base a a to the log base a
of x is equal to x. We can describe this by saying that an exponential function and a
log function with the same base undo each other. If you're familiar with the language
of inverse functions, the exponential function and log function are inverses. Let's see why
these roles hold for the first log role. log base a of a dx is asking the question, What
power do we raise a two in order to get a to the x? In other words, a to what power
is a to the x? Well, the answer is clearly x. And that's why log base a of a to the x
equals x. For the second log rule, notice that the log base a of x means the power we
raise a two to get x. But this expression is saying that we're supposed to raise a to
that power. If we raise a to the power, we need to raise a two to get x, then we'll certainly
get x. Now let's use these two roles. In some examples. If we want to find three to the
log base three of 1.43 to the power and log base three undo each other, so we're left
with 1.4. Remember, that log base 10 on your calculator
is the log button. While log base e on your calculator is the natural log button, you
should find that the log base 10 of 10 cubed is three, the log base e of e to the 4.2 is
4.2 10 to the log base 10 of 1000 is 1000. And eat the log base e of 9.6 is 9.6. In each
case, the log and the exponential function with the same base undo each other, and we're
left with the exponent. In fact, it's true that for any base a the log base a of a to
the x is equal to x. The same sort of cancellation happens if we do the exponential function
in the log function with the same base in the opposite order. For example, we take 10
to the power of log base 10 of 1000, the 10 to the power and the log base 10 undo each
other, and we're left with the 1000s. This happens for any base a a to the log base a
of x is equal to x. We can describe this by saying that an exponential function and a
log function with the same base undo each other. If you're familiar with the language
of inverse functions, the exponential function and log function are inverses. Let's see why
these roles hold for the first log role. log base a of a dx is asking the question, What
power do we raise a two in order to get a to the x? In other words, a to what power
is a to the x? Well, the answer is clearly x. And that's why log base a of a to the x
equals x. For the second log rule, notice that the log base a of x means the power we
raise a two to get x. But this expression is saying that we're supposed to raise a to
that power. If we raise a to the power, we need to raise a two to get x, then we'll certainly
get x. Now let's use these two roles. In some examples. If we want to find three to the
log base three of 1.43 to the power and log base three undo each other, so we're left
with 1.4. If we want to find ln of e to the x, remember
that ln means log base e, so we're taking log base e of e to the x. If we want to find ln of e to the x, remember
that ln means log base e, so we're taking log base e of e to the x. Well, those functions undo each other and
we're left with x. If we want to take 10 to the log of three z, remember that log without
a base written implies that the base is 10. So really, we want to take 10 to the log base
10 of three z will tend to a power and log base 10 undo each other. So we're left with
a three z. Finally, does this last statement hold is ln of 10 to the x equal to x? Well,
ln means log base e. So we're taking log base e of 10 to the x, notice that the base of
the log and the base of the exponential function are not the same thing. So they don't undo
each other. And in fact, log base e of 10 to the x is not usually equal to x, we can
check with one example, say if x equals one, then log base e of 10 to the one, that's log
base e of 10. And we can check on the calculator that's equal to 2.3. In some more decimals,
which is not the same thing as one. So this statement is false, it does not hold. We need
the basis to be the same for logs and exponent to undo each other. In this video, we saw
that logs and exponents with the same base undo each other. Specifically, log base a
of a to the x is equal to x and a to the log base a of x is also equal to x Well, those functions undo each other and
we're left with x. If we want to take 10 to the log of three z, remember that log without
a base written implies that the base is 10. So really, we want to take 10 to the log base
10 of three z will tend to a power and log base 10 undo each other. So we're left with
a three z. Finally, does this last statement hold is ln of 10 to the x equal to x? Well,
ln means log base e. So we're taking log base e of 10 to the x, notice that the base of
the log and the base of the exponential function are not the same thing. So they don't undo
each other. And in fact, log base e of 10 to the x is not usually equal to x, we can
check with one example, say if x equals one, then log base e of 10 to the one, that's log
base e of 10. And we can check on the calculator that's equal to 2.3. In some more decimals,
which is not the same thing as one. So this statement is false, it does not hold. We need
the basis to be the same for logs and exponent to undo each other. In this video, we saw
that logs and exponents with the same base undo each other. Specifically, log base a
of a to the x is equal to x and a to the log base a of x is also equal to x for any values of x and any base a. This video
is about rules or properties of logs. The log rules are closely related to the exponent
rules. So let's start by reviewing some of the exponent rules. for any values of x and any base a. This video
is about rules or properties of logs. The log rules are closely related to the exponent
rules. So let's start by reviewing some of the exponent rules. To keep things simple, we'll write everything
down with a base of two. Even though the exponent rules hold for any base, we know that if we
raise two to the zero power, we get one, we have a product rule for exponents, which says
that two to the M times two to the n is equal to two to the m plus n. In other words, if
we multiply two numbers, then we add the exponents. We also have a quotient rule that says that
two to the M divided by n to the n is equal to two to the m minus n. In words, that says
that if we divide two numbers, then we subtract the exponents. Finally, we have a power rule
that says if we take a power to a power, then we multiply the exponents. Each of these exponent
rules can be rewritten as a log rule. The first rule, two to the zero equals one can
be rewritten in terms of logs as log base two of one equals zero. That's because log
base two of one equals zero means two to the zero equals one. The second rule, the product
rule, can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying log of x times y equals log of x plus
log of y. I'll make these base two to agree with my base that I'm using for my exponent
rules. In words, that says the log of the product is the sum of the logs. Since logs
really represent exponents. This is saying that when you multiply two numbers together,
you add their exponents, which is just what we said for the exponent version. The quotient
rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x divided by
y is equal to the log of x minus the log of y. In words, we can say that the log of the
quotient is equal to the difference of the logs. Since logs are really exponents, another
way of saying the same thing is that when you divide two numbers, you subtract their
exponents. That's how we described the exponent rule above. Finally, the power rule for exponents
can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x to the n is equal to n times
log of x. Sometimes people describe this rule by saying when you take the log of an expression
with an exponent, you can bring down the exponent and multiply. If we think of x as being some
power of two, this is really saying when we take a power to a power, we multiply their
exponents. That's exactly how we described the power rule above. It doesn't really matter
if you multiply this exponent on the left side, or on the right side, but it's more
traditional to multiply it on the left side. I've given these rules with the base of two,
but they actually work for any base. To help you remember them, please take a moment to
write out the log rules using a base of a you should get the following chart. Let's
use the log rules to rewrite the following expressions as a sum or difference of logs.
In the first expression, we have a log base 10 of a quotient. So we can rewrite the log
of the quotient To keep things simple, we'll write everything
down with a base of two. Even though the exponent rules hold for any base, we know that if we
raise two to the zero power, we get one, we have a product rule for exponents, which says
that two to the M times two to the n is equal to two to the m plus n. In other words, if
we multiply two numbers, then we add the exponents. We also have a quotient rule that says that
two to the M divided by n to the n is equal to two to the m minus n. In words, that says
that if we divide two numbers, then we subtract the exponents. Finally, we have a power rule
that says if we take a power to a power, then we multiply the exponents. Each of these exponent
rules can be rewritten as a log rule. The first rule, two to the zero equals one can
be rewritten in terms of logs as log base two of one equals zero. That's because log
base two of one equals zero means two to the zero equals one. The second rule, the product
rule, can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying log of x times y equals log of x plus
log of y. I'll make these base two to agree with my base that I'm using for my exponent
rules. In words, that says the log of the product is the sum of the logs. Since logs
really represent exponents. This is saying that when you multiply two numbers together,
you add their exponents, which is just what we said for the exponent version. The quotient
rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x divided by
y is equal to the log of x minus the log of y. In words, we can say that the log of the
quotient is equal to the difference of the logs. Since logs are really exponents, another
way of saying the same thing is that when you divide two numbers, you subtract their
exponents. That's how we described the exponent rule above. Finally, the power rule for exponents
can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x to the n is equal to n times
log of x. Sometimes people describe this rule by saying when you take the log of an expression
with an exponent, you can bring down the exponent and multiply. If we think of x as being some
power of two, this is really saying when we take a power to a power, we multiply their
exponents. That's exactly how we described the power rule above. It doesn't really matter
if you multiply this exponent on the left side, or on the right side, but it's more
traditional to multiply it on the left side. I've given these rules with the base of two,
but they actually work for any base. To help you remember them, please take a moment to
write out the log rules using a base of a you should get the following chart. Let's
use the log rules to rewrite the following expressions as a sum or difference of logs.
In the first expression, we have a log base 10 of a quotient. So we can rewrite the log
of the quotient as the difference of the logs. Now we still
have the log of a product, I can rewrite the log of a product as the sum of the logs as the difference of the logs. Now we still
have the log of a product, I can rewrite the log of a product as the sum of the logs So that is log of y plus log of z. When I
put things together, I have to be careful, because here I'm subtracting the entire log
expression. So I need to subtract both terms of this son. So that is log of y plus log of z. When I
put things together, I have to be careful, because here I'm subtracting the entire log
expression. So I need to subtract both terms of this son. I'll make sure I do that by putting them in
parentheses. Now I can simplify a little bit by distributing the negative sign. And here's
my final answer. In my next expression, I have the log of a product. So I can rewrite
that as the sum of two logs. I can also use my power rule to bring down the exponent T,
and multiply it in the front. That gives me the final expression log of five plus I'll make sure I do that by putting them in
parentheses. Now I can simplify a little bit by distributing the negative sign. And here's
my final answer. In my next expression, I have the log of a product. So I can rewrite
that as the sum of two logs. I can also use my power rule to bring down the exponent T,
and multiply it in the front. That gives me the final expression log of five plus t times log of two. One common mistake on
this problem is to rewrite this expression as t times log of five times two. In fact,
those two expressions are not equal. Because the T only applies to the two, not to the
whole five times two, we can't just bring it down in front using the power rule. After
all, the power rule only applies to a single expression raised to an exponent, and not
to a product like this. And these next examples, we're going to go the other direction. Here,
we're given sums and differences of logs. And we want to wrap them up into a single
log expression. By look at the first two pieces, that's a difference of logs. So I know I can
rewrite it as the log of a quotient. Now I have the sum of two logs. So I can rewrite
that as the log of a product. I'll clean that up a little bit and rewrite it as log base
five of a times c over B. In my second example, I can rewrite the sum of my logs as the log
of a product. Now, I would like to rewrite this difference of logs as the log of a quotient,
but I can't do it yet, because of that factor of two multiplied in front. But I can use
the power rule backwards to put that two back up in the exponent. So I'll do that first.
So I will copy down the ln of x plus one times x minus one, and rewrite this second term
as ln of x squared minus one squared. Now I have a straightforward difference of two
logs, which I can rewrite as the log of a quotient. I can actually simplify this some
more. Since x plus one times x minus one is the same thing as x squared minus one. I can
cancel factors to get ln of one over x squared minus one. In this video, we solve for rules
for logs that are related to exponent rules. First, we saw that the log with any base of
one is equal to zero. Second, we saw the product rule, the log of a product is equal to the
sum of the logs. We saw the quotient rule, the log of a quotient is the difference of
the logs. And we saw the power rule. When you take a log of an expression with an exponent
in it, you can bring down the exponent and multiply it. It's worth noticing that there's
no log rule that helps you split up the log of a song. In particular, the log of a psalm
is not equal to the sum of the logs. If you think about logs and exponent rules going
together, this kind of makes sense, because there's also no rule for rewriting the sum
of two exponential expressions. Log roles will be super handy. As we start to solve
equations using locks. The chain rule is a really useful method for finding the derivative
of the composition of two functions. Let's start with a brief review of composition.
f composed with g means that we apply f to the output of G as a diagram, this means we
start with x and apply g first. t times log of two. One common mistake on
this problem is to rewrite this expression as t times log of five times two. In fact,
those two expressions are not equal. Because the T only applies to the two, not to the
whole five times two, we can't just bring it down in front using the power rule. After
all, the power rule only applies to a single expression raised to an exponent, and not
to a product like this. And these next examples, we're going to go the other direction. Here,
we're given sums and differences of logs. And we want to wrap them up into a single
log expression. By look at the first two pieces, that's a difference of logs. So I know I can
rewrite it as the log of a quotient. Now I have the sum of two logs. So I can rewrite
that as the log of a product. I'll clean that up a little bit and rewrite it as log base
five of a times c over B. In my second example, I can rewrite the sum of my logs as the log
of a product. Now, I would like to rewrite this difference of logs as the log of a quotient,
but I can't do it yet, because of that factor of two multiplied in front. But I can use
the power rule backwards to put that two back up in the exponent. So I'll do that first.
So I will copy down the ln of x plus one times x minus one, and rewrite this second term
as ln of x squared minus one squared. Now I have a straightforward difference of two
logs, which I can rewrite as the log of a quotient. I can actually simplify this some
more. Since x plus one times x minus one is the same thing as x squared minus one. I can
cancel factors to get ln of one over x squared minus one. In this video, we solve for rules
for logs that are related to exponent rules. First, we saw that the log with any base of
one is equal to zero. Second, we saw the product rule, the log of a product is equal to the
sum of the logs. We saw the quotient rule, the log of a quotient is the difference of
the logs. And we saw the power rule. When you take a log of an expression with an exponent
in it, you can bring down the exponent and multiply it. It's worth noticing that there's
no log rule that helps you split up the log of a song. In particular, the log of a psalm
is not equal to the sum of the logs. If you think about logs and exponent rules going
together, this kind of makes sense, because there's also no rule for rewriting the sum
of two exponential expressions. Log roles will be super handy. As we start to solve
equations using locks. The chain rule is a really useful method for finding the derivative
of the composition of two functions. Let's start with a brief review of composition.
f composed with g means that we apply f to the output of G as a diagram, this means we
start with x and apply g first. Then we apply f to the output to get our final
results I'm going to call G, the inner function, and F the outer function. Because g looks
like it's on the inside of f, Then we apply f to the output to get our final
results I'm going to call G, the inner function, and F the outer function. Because g looks
like it's on the inside of f, in this standard notation, we can write h
of x, which is the square root of sine of x as the composition of two functions, by
letting sine of x be the inner function, and the square root function be the outer function,
which I write as f of u equals the square root of u. I like to do this sort of dissection
of functions, by drawing a box around part of the function, whatever is inside the box
becomes my inner function, whatever we do to the box becomes our outer function, in
this case, taking the square root. This allows us to write h of x as the composition, f of
g of x, where f and g are the outer and inner functions defined here. Please take a moment
to write the next two functions as compositions of functions, before you go on. A natural
way to write k of x as a composition is to let our inner function be tan of x plus seacon
of x. The outer function describes what happens to that box the inner function, it gets cubed
and multiplied by five. There's several ways to write the next example as a composition
of functions. For example, we could take x squared as our inner function, and then our
outer function takes a to the sign of that inner function. Alternatively, we could take
the inner function to be sine of x squared. And then the outer function in this standard notation, we can write h
of x, which is the square root of sine of x as the composition of two functions, by
letting sine of x be the inner function, and the square root function be the outer function,
which I write as f of u equals the square root of u. I like to do this sort of dissection
of functions, by drawing a box around part of the function, whatever is inside the box
becomes my inner function, whatever we do to the box becomes our outer function, in
this case, taking the square root. This allows us to write h of x as the composition, f of
g of x, where f and g are the outer and inner functions defined here. Please take a moment
to write the next two functions as compositions of functions, before you go on. A natural
way to write k of x as a composition is to let our inner function be tan of x plus seacon
of x. The outer function describes what happens to that box the inner function, it gets cubed
and multiplied by five. There's several ways to write the next example as a composition
of functions. For example, we could take x squared as our inner function, and then our
outer function takes a to the sign of that inner function. Alternatively, we could take
the inner function to be sine of x squared. And then the outer function has to be e to the power. It's also possible
to write our function r of x as a composition of three functions. An inner function of x
squared, a middle function of sine and an outermost function of e to the power, which
are right as h of V equals e to the V. has to be e to the power. It's also possible
to write our function r of x as a composition of three functions. An inner function of x
squared, a middle function of sine and an outermost function of e to the power, which
are right as h of V equals e to the V. When calculating the derivatives of complicated
functions, it's really important to recognize them as compositions of simpler functions.
That way, we can build up the derivative in terms of the simpler derivatives. And that's
the idea behind the chain rule. The chain rule tells us if we have two differentiable
functions, then the derivative of the composition f composed with g of x is equal to the derivative
of the outer function evaluated on the inner function times the derivative of the inner
function. Sometimes the chain rule is written instead, in lightness notation, that is the
dydx notation. To see how this works, let's let u equal g of x. And let's let y equal
f of u. In other words, y is f of When calculating the derivatives of complicated
functions, it's really important to recognize them as compositions of simpler functions.
That way, we can build up the derivative in terms of the simpler derivatives. And that's
the idea behind the chain rule. The chain rule tells us if we have two differentiable
functions, then the derivative of the composition f composed with g of x is equal to the derivative
of the outer function evaluated on the inner function times the derivative of the inner
function. Sometimes the chain rule is written instead, in lightness notation, that is the
dydx notation. To see how this works, let's let u equal g of x. And let's let y equal
f of u. In other words, y is f of g of x. g of x. Now do u dx is just another way of writing
g prime of x, and d y d u is another way of writing f prime of U. or in other words, f
prime of g of x. Finally, if we write D y dX, that means we're taking the derivative
of f composed with g. So that's f composed with g prime of x. Using this key, I can rewrite
the expression above as the y dx equals d y d u Now do u dx is just another way of writing
g prime of x, and d y d u is another way of writing f prime of U. or in other words, f
prime of g of x. Finally, if we write D y dX, that means we're taking the derivative
of f composed with g. So that's f composed with g prime of x. Using this key, I can rewrite
the expression above as the y dx equals d y d u times d u dx. These are the two alternative
ways of writing the chain rule. Let's use the chain rule to take the derivative of the
square root of sine x. times d u dx. These are the two alternative
ways of writing the chain rule. Let's use the chain rule to take the derivative of the
square root of sine x. Actually, I'm going to rewrite this as h of
x equals sine x to the one half power to make it easier to take derivatives. As a composition,
we're thinking of the inner function as sine x and the outer function as the one half power.
So the chain rule tells us that to take h prime Actually, I'm going to rewrite this as h of
x equals sine x to the one half power to make it easier to take derivatives. As a composition,
we're thinking of the inner function as sine x and the outer function as the one half power.
So the chain rule tells us that to take h prime of x we need to take the derivative of the
outer function evaluated on the inner function and then multiply that by the derivative of
the inner function, we know that the derivative of the inner function, sine x is just cosine
x. And the derivative of the outer function is one half times u to the negative one half.
So h prime of x is then one half times u to the negative one half. But that's evaluated
on the inner function, sine of of x we need to take the derivative of the
outer function evaluated on the inner function and then multiply that by the derivative of
the inner function, we know that the derivative of the inner function, sine x is just cosine
x. And the derivative of the outer function is one half times u to the negative one half.
So h prime of x is then one half times u to the negative one half. But that's evaluated
on the inner function, sine of x. x. And then we multiply that by cosine of x.
Again, that's the derivative of the outer function evaluated on the inner function times
the derivative of the inner function. And we found the derivative using the chain rule.
For the next example, our inner function was tan x plus seacon X and our outer function,
f of u was five u cubed. So k prime of x is 15 times u squared. But that's the evaluated
on the inner function 10x plus seacon x, then we still need to multiply that by the derivative
of the inner function 10x plus seacon x. So we get the 15 tan x plus secant x squared
times the derivative of tan x, which is secant squared x, plus the derivative of secant x,
which is secant x, tan x. And that's our chain rule derivative. In this last example, we're
thinking of the outermost function as being e to the power and its inner function is sine
of x squared. But sine of x squared itself has an outer function of sine and an inner
function of x squared. So to find r prime of x, we first have to take the derivative
of the outermost function, well, the derivative of e to the power is just e to the power. And then we multiply that by cosine of x.
Again, that's the derivative of the outer function evaluated on the inner function times
the derivative of the inner function. And we found the derivative using the chain rule.
For the next example, our inner function was tan x plus seacon X and our outer function,
f of u was five u cubed. So k prime of x is 15 times u squared. But that's the evaluated
on the inner function 10x plus seacon x, then we still need to multiply that by the derivative
of the inner function 10x plus seacon x. So we get the 15 tan x plus secant x squared
times the derivative of tan x, which is secant squared x, plus the derivative of secant x,
which is secant x, tan x. And that's our chain rule derivative. In this last example, we're
thinking of the outermost function as being e to the power and its inner function is sine
of x squared. But sine of x squared itself has an outer function of sine and an inner
function of x squared. So to find r prime of x, we first have to take the derivative
of the outermost function, well, the derivative of e to the power is just e to the power. And now we evaluate that on its inner function,
sine of x squared. But now by the chain rule, we have to multiply that by the derivative
of the inner function, sine of x squared. I'll copy down the E to the sine x squared.
And I'll use the chain rule a second time to find the derivative of sine x squared.
Now the outer function is sine, and the derivative of sine is cosine. I need to evaluate it on
its inner function of x squared, and then multiply that by the derivative of the inner
function. After copying things down, I just have to take the derivative of x squared,
which is 2x And now we evaluate that on its inner function,
sine of x squared. But now by the chain rule, we have to multiply that by the derivative
of the inner function, sine of x squared. I'll copy down the E to the sine x squared.
And I'll use the chain rule a second time to find the derivative of sine x squared.
Now the outer function is sine, and the derivative of sine is cosine. I need to evaluate it on
its inner function of x squared, and then multiply that by the derivative of the inner
function. After copying things down, I just have to take the derivative of x squared,
which is 2x by the power. by the power. This video introduced the chain rule, which
says that the derivative of f composed with g at x is equal to f prime at g of x times
g prime at x, or equivalently, d y dx is equal to d y d u times d u dx. This video gives
some more examples and a justification of the chain rule, and also includes a handy
formula for the derivative of a to the x with respect to x, where A is any positive number.
In the next example, I want to show using the chain rule that the derivative of five
to the x is equal to ln five times five to the x. First, I want to rewrite five to the
x as easily ln five times x. And I can do that because e to the ln five is equal to
five. So e to the ln five to the x power is equal to five to the x. But e to the ln five
to the x power using exponent rules is just e to the ln five times x. So if I want to
take the derivative of five to the x, after rewriting it as e to the ln five times x,
let me think of the inner function as being ln five times x. And I'm going to think of
the outer function as being E to that power. That's what I wanted to Make the derivative
of. So by the chain rule, I can first take the derivative of the outer function, derivative
of e to the power is just e to the power, and I evaluate it at its inner function. But
then by the chain rule, I need to take the derivative of the inner function, well, the
derivative of ln five times x is just the constant coefficient ln five. And that's my
derivative. Now, I know that e to the ln five times x is just five to the x. That's what
we talked about before. So my final answer is five to the x times ln five, or I guess
I can rewrite that in the other order. That is that there's nothing special about five
in this example, I could have done this same process with any a base positive base a. So
I'm going to write that as a general principle that the derivative of a to the x with respect
to x is equal to ln a times a to the x. This is a fact worth memorizing. I'll use this
fact to compute the derivative of this complicated expression, sine of 5x times the square root
of two to the cosine 5x plus one. To find dydx, I'll first use the product rule, since
our expression is the product of two other expressions. So D y dX is the first expression
times the derivative of the second expression, which I'll go ahead and write using an exponent
instead of a square root sign, plus the derivative of the first expression times the second expression.
Now I'll need to use the chain rule to evaluate the derivative here. My outermost function
is the function that raises everything to the one half power. So when I take the derivative,
I can use the power rule, bring down the one half, right to the cosine 5x plus one to the
negative one half. But then by the chain rule, I'm going to have to multiply by the derivative
of the inner function, which is to to the cosine 5x plus one, I'll just carry along
the rest of my expression for now, what I want to take the derivative of two to the
cosine 5x plus one, I'm going to have to use the chain rule again, thinking of my outer
function as being two to the power plus one. So let me copy things down on the next line.
Now taking the derivative, the derivative of one is just zero, so I'm really just taking
the derivative of two to the cosine 5x. And by my formula, this is going to be ln f two
times two This video introduced the chain rule, which
says that the derivative of f composed with g at x is equal to f prime at g of x times
g prime at x, or equivalently, d y dx is equal to d y d u times d u dx. This video gives
some more examples and a justification of the chain rule, and also includes a handy
formula for the derivative of a to the x with respect to x, where A is any positive number.
In the next example, I want to show using the chain rule that the derivative of five
to the x is equal to ln five times five to the x. First, I want to rewrite five to the
x as easily ln five times x. And I can do that because e to the ln five is equal to
five. So e to the ln five to the x power is equal to five to the x. But e to the ln five
to the x power using exponent rules is just e to the ln five times x. So if I want to
take the derivative of five to the x, after rewriting it as e to the ln five times x,
let me think of the inner function as being ln five times x. And I'm going to think of
the outer function as being E to that power. That's what I wanted to Make the derivative
of. So by the chain rule, I can first take the derivative of the outer function, derivative
of e to the power is just e to the power, and I evaluate it at its inner function. But
then by the chain rule, I need to take the derivative of the inner function, well, the
derivative of ln five times x is just the constant coefficient ln five. And that's my
derivative. Now, I know that e to the ln five times x is just five to the x. That's what
we talked about before. So my final answer is five to the x times ln five, or I guess
I can rewrite that in the other order. That is that there's nothing special about five
in this example, I could have done this same process with any a base positive base a. So
I'm going to write that as a general principle that the derivative of a to the x with respect
to x is equal to ln a times a to the x. This is a fact worth memorizing. I'll use this
fact to compute the derivative of this complicated expression, sine of 5x times the square root
of two to the cosine 5x plus one. To find dydx, I'll first use the product rule, since
our expression is the product of two other expressions. So D y dX is the first expression
times the derivative of the second expression, which I'll go ahead and write using an exponent
instead of a square root sign, plus the derivative of the first expression times the second expression.
Now I'll need to use the chain rule to evaluate the derivative here. My outermost function
is the function that raises everything to the one half power. So when I take the derivative,
I can use the power rule, bring down the one half, right to the cosine 5x plus one to the
negative one half. But then by the chain rule, I'm going to have to multiply by the derivative
of the inner function, which is to to the cosine 5x plus one, I'll just carry along
the rest of my expression for now, what I want to take the derivative of two to the
cosine 5x plus one, I'm going to have to use the chain rule again, thinking of my outer
function as being two to the power plus one. So let me copy things down on the next line.
Now taking the derivative, the derivative of one is just zero, so I'm really just taking
the derivative of two to the cosine 5x. And by my formula, this is going to be ln f two
times two to the power of cosine 5x. But of course,
I have to use the chain rule to the power of cosine 5x. But of course,
I have to use the chain rule and multiply by that the derivative of the
inner function here, which is cosine 5x. Again, I'm just going to carry the rest of the expression
along with me for the ride for now. Now we're taking the derivative of cosine 5x, I think
of cosine as the outer function. And five times x is the inner function. Similarly,
down here, sign is the outer function, and 5x is the inner function. So I can complete
my work by copying a lot of stuff down, and now taking the derivative of cosine, which
is minus sine, evaluated at its inner function, times the derivative of the inner function
5x, which is just five. And I'm going to add to that the derivative of sine of 5x. Well,
the derivative of sine is cosine, evaluated on its inner function times the derivative
of the inner function 5x, which is just five times the rest of the stuff. I'll do a modest
amount of simplification, maybe bring the constants out and combine any terms that I
can. And that's the end of that complicated example. And the next example, we'll try to
find the derivative of a composition at the value x equals one just based on a table of
values. So the chain rule says that the derivative of f composed with g is just going to be f
prime evaluated g of x times g prime evaluated x, but I want to do this whole process at
x equals one. So that's just going to be f prime at g of one times g prime of one. Well,
g of one is two. So I really want f prime at two, and f prime at two is 10. And g prime
at one is negative five. So my answer is negative 50. I'm not going to give a rigorous proof
of the chain rule. But I would like to give a more informal explanation based on the limit
definition of derivative. So I'm going to write the derivative of f composed with g
evaluated a point A, as the limit as x goes to a of f composed with g of x minus f composed
with g of A divided by x minus a. I'll rewrite this slightly. And now we're going to multiply
the top and the bottom by g of x minus g of a, that doesn't change the value of expression,
provided that g of x minus g of A is not zero. That's the detail on sweeping under the rug
here and why this is not a real proof, but just a more informal explanation. Now if I
rearrange things, and rewrite the limit of the product as the product of the limits,
my limit on the right here is just the derivative of g. for the limit on the left, notice that
as x goes to a, g of x has to go to g of a, since G is differentiable on there for continuous
function. So I can rewrite this and letting say u be equal to g of x, I can rewrite this
as the limit as u goes to g of a of f of u minus f of g of A over u minus g of a. Now
my expression on the left is just another way of writing the derivative of f evaluated
at g of a. And I've arrived at the expression for the chain rule. Let me just emphasize
again, this is just a pseudo proof, it's not quite airtight, because g of x minus g of
a might be zero. In this video, we saw some more examples of the chain rule justification
of it. And we saw that the derivative respect to x and multiply by that the derivative of the
inner function here, which is cosine 5x. Again, I'm just going to carry the rest of the expression
along with me for the ride for now. Now we're taking the derivative of cosine 5x, I think
of cosine as the outer function. And five times x is the inner function. Similarly,
down here, sign is the outer function, and 5x is the inner function. So I can complete
my work by copying a lot of stuff down, and now taking the derivative of cosine, which
is minus sine, evaluated at its inner function, times the derivative of the inner function
5x, which is just five. And I'm going to add to that the derivative of sine of 5x. Well,
the derivative of sine is cosine, evaluated on its inner function times the derivative
of the inner function 5x, which is just five times the rest of the stuff. I'll do a modest
amount of simplification, maybe bring the constants out and combine any terms that I
can. And that's the end of that complicated example. And the next example, we'll try to
find the derivative of a composition at the value x equals one just based on a table of
values. So the chain rule says that the derivative of f composed with g is just going to be f
prime evaluated g of x times g prime evaluated x, but I want to do this whole process at
x equals one. So that's just going to be f prime at g of one times g prime of one. Well,
g of one is two. So I really want f prime at two, and f prime at two is 10. And g prime
at one is negative five. So my answer is negative 50. I'm not going to give a rigorous proof
of the chain rule. But I would like to give a more informal explanation based on the limit
definition of derivative. So I'm going to write the derivative of f composed with g
evaluated a point A, as the limit as x goes to a of f composed with g of x minus f composed
with g of A divided by x minus a. I'll rewrite this slightly. And now we're going to multiply
the top and the bottom by g of x minus g of a, that doesn't change the value of expression,
provided that g of x minus g of A is not zero. That's the detail on sweeping under the rug
here and why this is not a real proof, but just a more informal explanation. Now if I
rearrange things, and rewrite the limit of the product as the product of the limits,
my limit on the right here is just the derivative of g. for the limit on the left, notice that
as x goes to a, g of x has to go to g of a, since G is differentiable on there for continuous
function. So I can rewrite this and letting say u be equal to g of x, I can rewrite this
as the limit as u goes to g of a of f of u minus f of g of A over u minus g of a. Now
my expression on the left is just another way of writing the derivative of f evaluated
at g of a. And I've arrived at the expression for the chain rule. Let me just emphasize
again, this is just a pseudo proof, it's not quite airtight, because g of x minus g of
a might be zero. In this video, we saw some more examples of the chain rule justification
of it. And we saw that the derivative respect to x of A to the X is equal to ln of a times a
to the x. This video gives an explanation for why the chain rule holds. of A to the X is equal to ln of a times a
to the x. This video gives an explanation for why the chain rule holds. I'm not going to give a rigorous proof of
the chain rule. But I would like to give a more informal explanation based on the limit
definition of derivative. I'm not going to give a rigorous proof of
the chain rule. But I would like to give a more informal explanation based on the limit
definition of derivative. So I'm going to write the derivative of f
composed with g evaluated a point A, as the limit as x goes to a of f composed with g
of x minus f composed with g of A divided by x minus a. I'll rewrite this slightly.
And now we're going to multiply the top and the bottom by g of x minus g of a, that doesn't
change the value of expression, provided that g of x minus g of A is not zero. That's the
detail on sweeping under the rug here and why this is not a real proof, but just a more
informal explanation. Now if I rearrange things, and rewrite the limit of the product as the
product of the limits, my limit on the right here is just the derivative of g. for the
limit on the left, notice that as x goes to a, g of x has to go to G evey, since G is
differentiable on there for a continuous function, so I can rewrite this and letting say u be
equal to g of x, I can rewrite this as the limit as u goes to g of a of f of u minus
f of g of A So I'm going to write the derivative of f
composed with g evaluated a point A, as the limit as x goes to a of f composed with g
of x minus f composed with g of A divided by x minus a. I'll rewrite this slightly.
And now we're going to multiply the top and the bottom by g of x minus g of a, that doesn't
change the value of expression, provided that g of x minus g of A is not zero. That's the
detail on sweeping under the rug here and why this is not a real proof, but just a more
informal explanation. Now if I rearrange things, and rewrite the limit of the product as the
product of the limits, my limit on the right here is just the derivative of g. for the
limit on the left, notice that as x goes to a, g of x has to go to G evey, since G is
differentiable on there for a continuous function, so I can rewrite this and letting say u be
equal to g of x, I can rewrite this as the limit as u goes to g of a of f of u minus
f of g of A over over u minus g of a. Now my expression on the left
is just another way of writing the derivative of f evaluated at G Ave. And I've arrived
at the expression for the chain rule. Let me just emphasize again, this is just a pseudo
proof it's not quite airtight because g of x minus g of a might be zero. That's all for
the justification of the chain rule. For a complete proof. Please see the textbook implicit
differentiation is a technique for finding the slopes of tangent lines for curves that
are defined indirectly, and sometimes aren't even functions. So far, we've developed a
lot of techniques for finding derivatives of functions defined explicitly, in terms
of the equation y equals something. In this section, we'll consider curves that are defined
implicitly, in terms of any equation involving x's and y's. So the points on this curve are
the values of x and y that satisfy this equation. As you can see, when you have implicitly defined
curves, they are not necessarily functions. And in fact, they can not only violate the
vertical line test, but they can cross themselves, or be broken up into several pieces or look
like really cool pictures like this flower. But small pieces of these curves do satisfy
the vertical line test for small pieces, y is a function of x. And that allows us to
use our calculus techniques, especially the chain rule, to compute derivatives for these
implicitly defined curves. u minus g of a. Now my expression on the left
is just another way of writing the derivative of f evaluated at G Ave. And I've arrived
at the expression for the chain rule. Let me just emphasize again, this is just a pseudo
proof it's not quite airtight because g of x minus g of a might be zero. That's all for
the justification of the chain rule. For a complete proof. Please see the textbook implicit
differentiation is a technique for finding the slopes of tangent lines for curves that
are defined indirectly, and sometimes aren't even functions. So far, we've developed a
lot of techniques for finding derivatives of functions defined explicitly, in terms
of the equation y equals something. In this section, we'll consider curves that are defined
implicitly, in terms of any equation involving x's and y's. So the points on this curve are
the values of x and y that satisfy this equation. As you can see, when you have implicitly defined
curves, they are not necessarily functions. And in fact, they can not only violate the
vertical line test, but they can cross themselves, or be broken up into several pieces or look
like really cool pictures like this flower. But small pieces of these curves do satisfy
the vertical line test for small pieces, y is a function of x. And that allows us to
use our calculus techniques, especially the chain rule, to compute derivatives for these
implicitly defined curves. As usual, the derivative dy dx represents
the slope of a tangent line. For our first example, let's find the equation of the tangent
line for the lips 9x squared plus four y squared equals 25. drawn below at the point, one,
two. From the picture, it looks like the slope of this tangent line should be about negative
one, but let's use calculus to find it exactly. So there are at least two ways we could proceed.
First, we could solve for y, and then use the same techniques that we've been using.
So if we solve for y, we get for y squared equals 25 minus 9x squared. So y squared is
25 minus 9x squared over four, which means that y is plus or minus the square root of
25 minus 9x squared over four, or in other words, plus or minus the square root of 25
minus 9x squared over two, the plus answer is giving us the top half of the ellipse.
And the minus answer is giving us this bottom. Since the point one, two is on the top part
of the ellipse, let's focus on the positive version. And let's take the derivative. But
first, let me rewrite one more time to put it in a slightly easier form, instead of dividing
by two, I'm going to think of multiplying by the constant one half. And instead of taking
the square root, I'm going to write that as an exponent of one half here. So now if I
want to take the y dx, I can pull out the constant of one half. And now I'll start using
the chain rule where my outer function As usual, the derivative dy dx represents
the slope of a tangent line. For our first example, let's find the equation of the tangent
line for the lips 9x squared plus four y squared equals 25. drawn below at the point, one,
two. From the picture, it looks like the slope of this tangent line should be about negative
one, but let's use calculus to find it exactly. So there are at least two ways we could proceed.
First, we could solve for y, and then use the same techniques that we've been using.
So if we solve for y, we get for y squared equals 25 minus 9x squared. So y squared is
25 minus 9x squared over four, which means that y is plus or minus the square root of
25 minus 9x squared over four, or in other words, plus or minus the square root of 25
minus 9x squared over two, the plus answer is giving us the top half of the ellipse.
And the minus answer is giving us this bottom. Since the point one, two is on the top part
of the ellipse, let's focus on the positive version. And let's take the derivative. But
first, let me rewrite one more time to put it in a slightly easier form, instead of dividing
by two, I'm going to think of multiplying by the constant one half. And instead of taking
the square root, I'm going to write that as an exponent of one half here. So now if I
want to take the y dx, I can pull out the constant of one half. And now I'll start using
the chain rule where my outer function is is taking things to the one half power, and my
inner function is 25 minus 9x squared. So I'll take the derivative of my outer function
by bringing the one half down, taking the inner function to the negative one half. Now
I multiply by the derivative of the inner function, which is negative 18x. If I simplify
a little bit, I get D y dX is negative 18x over four times 25 minus 9x squared to the
one half power, or in other words, dy dx is negative 9x over two times the square root
of 25 minus 9x squared. This formula only holds for the top half of the ellipse for
the bottom half, we would need to use the negative. Now I want to evaluate the derivative
at the point one, two, so I'm going to take dydx. When x equals one, I get negative nine
over two times the square root of 25 minus nine, which is negative nine eighths. Since
I've found the slope of the tangent line, and I know that point one, two is a point
on the tangent line, I can now use the point slope form to write down the equation of the
tangent line. simplified this becomes y equals negative nine is x plus nine eights plus two,
or y equals negative nine, it's x plus 25. It's now that we've solved the problem once
using a familiar method. Let's go back to the beginning and solve it again using a new
method. method two is implicit differentiation. The idea is that I'm going to take the derivative
with respect to x of both sides. If my equation without having to solve for y, I can rewrite
the left side as nine times the derivative of x squared plus four times the derivative
of y squared. And the right side, the derivative of a constant is zero. Going back to the left
side, the derivative of x squared with respect to x is 2x. Now for the derivative of y squared
with respect to x, I'm going to need to use the chain rule, I'm going to think of taking
the squared power as my outside function, I'm going to think of y itself as my inside
function, my inside function of x. Even though my entire curve is not a function, for small
pieces of it, y is a function of x, so I can get away with doing this, the derivative of
my outside function y squared is to y, and the derivative of my inside function, y as
a function of x is just dydx. Now I can solve for dy dx, which is going to tell me the slope
of my tangent line. And so I get negative 18x from here, divided by eight y from here,
which simplifies to negative nine fourths times X over Y. Notice that the formula for
my derivative dydx has both x's and y's in it. Of course, for this problem, if I wanted
to, I could solve for y in terms of x using the original equation like I did in method
one, and plug that in for y and get an expression entirely in terms of x, which should be the
same as the expression I got previously. taking things to the one half power, and my
inner function is 25 minus 9x squared. So I'll take the derivative of my outer function
by bringing the one half down, taking the inner function to the negative one half. Now
I multiply by the derivative of the inner function, which is negative 18x. If I simplify
a little bit, I get D y dX is negative 18x over four times 25 minus 9x squared to the
one half power, or in other words, dy dx is negative 9x over two times the square root
of 25 minus 9x squared. This formula only holds for the top half of the ellipse for
the bottom half, we would need to use the negative. Now I want to evaluate the derivative
at the point one, two, so I'm going to take dydx. When x equals one, I get negative nine
over two times the square root of 25 minus nine, which is negative nine eighths. Since
I've found the slope of the tangent line, and I know that point one, two is a point
on the tangent line, I can now use the point slope form to write down the equation of the
tangent line. simplified this becomes y equals negative nine is x plus nine eights plus two,
or y equals negative nine, it's x plus 25. It's now that we've solved the problem once
using a familiar method. Let's go back to the beginning and solve it again using a new
method. method two is implicit differentiation. The idea is that I'm going to take the derivative
with respect to x of both sides. If my equation without having to solve for y, I can rewrite
the left side as nine times the derivative of x squared plus four times the derivative
of y squared. And the right side, the derivative of a constant is zero. Going back to the left
side, the derivative of x squared with respect to x is 2x. Now for the derivative of y squared
with respect to x, I'm going to need to use the chain rule, I'm going to think of taking
the squared power as my outside function, I'm going to think of y itself as my inside
function, my inside function of x. Even though my entire curve is not a function, for small
pieces of it, y is a function of x, so I can get away with doing this, the derivative of
my outside function y squared is to y, and the derivative of my inside function, y as
a function of x is just dydx. Now I can solve for dy dx, which is going to tell me the slope
of my tangent line. And so I get negative 18x from here, divided by eight y from here,
which simplifies to negative nine fourths times X over Y. Notice that the formula for
my derivative dydx has both x's and y's in it. Of course, for this problem, if I wanted
to, I could solve for y in terms of x using the original equation like I did in method
one, and plug that in for y and get an expression entirely in terms of x, which should be the
same as the expression I got previously. But I don't really But I don't really need to do that in order to solve this problem.
Instead, I can just plug in the x value of one and the y value of two to get dy dx at
x equals one, equal to negative nine fourths, times one half or negative nine, eight, which
we'll recognize as the same answer we got before. So as before, we can compute the equation
for the tangent line. And we'll again get y equals negative nine 8x plus 25, eights.
In this example, implicit differentiation was a convenient way to find the derivative.
But it was possible to solve for y and use standard methods instead. But in many examples,
like the next one, it's not possible to solve for y directly. And so implicit differentiation
is the only way to go. implicit differentiation is definitely the key to finding y prime for
this curve defined implicitly. So again, the idea is to take the derivative of both sides
with respect to x, I can break this up into pieces. And now use the product rule for the
first piece. So I get the first function x cubed times the derivative of the second function
y squared, the derivative of y squared is to y, d y dx, don't forget the dydx there,
because y is a function of x plus the derivative of the first part 3x squared times the second
part need to do that in order to solve this problem.
Instead, I can just plug in the x value of one and the y value of two to get dy dx at
x equals one, equal to negative nine fourths, times one half or negative nine, eight, which
we'll recognize as the same answer we got before. So as before, we can compute the equation
for the tangent line. And we'll again get y equals negative nine 8x plus 25, eights.
In this example, implicit differentiation was a convenient way to find the derivative.
But it was possible to solve for y and use standard methods instead. But in many examples,
like the next one, it's not possible to solve for y directly. And so implicit differentiation
is the only way to go. implicit differentiation is definitely the key to finding y prime for
this curve defined implicitly. So again, the idea is to take the derivative of both sides
with respect to x, I can break this up into pieces. And now use the product rule for the
first piece. So I get the first function x cubed times the derivative of the second function
y squared, the derivative of y squared is to y, d y dx, don't forget the dydx there,
because y is a function of x plus the derivative of the first part 3x squared times the second
part y squared. y squared. Next, I need to take the derivative of sine
x, y on the do use the chain rule here. So the derivative of the outside sine is cosine.
And now I need to take the derivative of the inside x times y. And that's going to be a
product rule application. So x times D y dX, plus the derivative of x, which is just one
times y. That all was just my left hand side. But fortunately, my right hand side is easier.
The derivative of x cubed with respect to x is 3x squared. And the derivative of y cubed
with respect to x is three y squared, dy dx. Now I need to solve for the y dx. And since
it's scattered all over the place in three different places, I'm first going to distribute
out to free it from these parentheses, and then I'll try to move all the dydx is to the
left side. So distributing out I get, I get this expression. And now moving alternatives
with dydx and add them to the left side and all terms without dydx mm to the right side.
I'm going to get this expression here. Now I'm going to factor out the dy dx. I'm just
using standard algebra techniques here. And finally, I can just divide both sides by all
this mess, too. isolate the dydx. And I found my derivative using implicit differentiation.
This video talked about using implicit differentiation to find the slopes of tangent lines for curves
defined implicitly, the main two steps, were first to take the derivative of both sides
with respect to x. And then to solve for dy dx. This video is about finding the derivatives
of exponential functions, we've already seen that the derivative of the exponential function,
e to the x is just itself, e to the x. But what's the derivative of an exponential function
with a different base, like five to the x, one way to find the derivative of an exponential
function like five to the X is to write five as e to a power. So five, is the same thing
as e to the ln five, where ln is the natural log or the log base. See, this makes sense
because ln five, which is the same thing as log base e of five, means the power that we
raise E to to get five. So now if we take e to the ln five, that means we raise e to
the power that we raise E to to get five? Well, when you raise E to that power, you
get five. All right, if five is the same thing as e to the ln five, then that means if we
take five to the x, that's the same thing as e to the ln five raised to the x power
BI properties of exponents, when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponents.
so this can be written as e to the ln five times x. Now I want to take the derivative
with respect to x of five to the x. So by my rewriting trick, that's the same thing
as taking the derivative with respect to x of e to the ln five times x. Now we know how
to calculate this using the chain rule, we can think of e to the power as our outside
function, and ln five times x as our inside function. So now by the chain rule, I take
the derivative of the outside function e to the power, and that's just gives me e to the
power evaluated on the inside function. So I stick ln five times x as my inside function,
and by the chain rule, I multiply that by the derivative of the inside function, ln
five times x. Five is a constant. So let me copy over first part, the derivative of a
constant times x is just the constant. Let me rewrite this a little bit. So e to the
ln five times x is the same thing as e to the ln five to the x power, just like before,
because the exponent rules say, when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponent,
and remember, is the LL five, it's just a fancy way of writing five. So I've got five
to the x times ln five as the derivative with respect to x of five to the x. The same argument
works not just for a base five exponential function, but for any base exponential function.
So if I take the respect to x of A to the X for any number A, I'm going to get Next, I need to take the derivative of sine
x, y on the do use the chain rule here. So the derivative of the outside sine is cosine.
And now I need to take the derivative of the inside x times y. And that's going to be a
product rule application. So x times D y dX, plus the derivative of x, which is just one
times y. That all was just my left hand side. But fortunately, my right hand side is easier.
The derivative of x cubed with respect to x is 3x squared. And the derivative of y cubed
with respect to x is three y squared, dy dx. Now I need to solve for the y dx. And since
it's scattered all over the place in three different places, I'm first going to distribute
out to free it from these parentheses, and then I'll try to move all the dydx is to the
left side. So distributing out I get, I get this expression. And now moving alternatives
with dydx and add them to the left side and all terms without dydx mm to the right side.
I'm going to get this expression here. Now I'm going to factor out the dy dx. I'm just
using standard algebra techniques here. And finally, I can just divide both sides by all
this mess, too. isolate the dydx. And I found my derivative using implicit differentiation.
This video talked about using implicit differentiation to find the slopes of tangent lines for curves
defined implicitly, the main two steps, were first to take the derivative of both sides
with respect to x. And then to solve for dy dx. This video is about finding the derivatives
of exponential functions, we've already seen that the derivative of the exponential function,
e to the x is just itself, e to the x. But what's the derivative of an exponential function
with a different base, like five to the x, one way to find the derivative of an exponential
function like five to the X is to write five as e to a power. So five, is the same thing
as e to the ln five, where ln is the natural log or the log base. See, this makes sense
because ln five, which is the same thing as log base e of five, means the power that we
raise E to to get five. So now if we take e to the ln five, that means we raise e to
the power that we raise E to to get five? Well, when you raise E to that power, you
get five. All right, if five is the same thing as e to the ln five, then that means if we
take five to the x, that's the same thing as e to the ln five raised to the x power
BI properties of exponents, when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponents.
so this can be written as e to the ln five times x. Now I want to take the derivative
with respect to x of five to the x. So by my rewriting trick, that's the same thing
as taking the derivative with respect to x of e to the ln five times x. Now we know how
to calculate this using the chain rule, we can think of e to the power as our outside
function, and ln five times x as our inside function. So now by the chain rule, I take
the derivative of the outside function e to the power, and that's just gives me e to the
power evaluated on the inside function. So I stick ln five times x as my inside function,
and by the chain rule, I multiply that by the derivative of the inside function, ln
five times x. Five is a constant. So let me copy over first part, the derivative of a
constant times x is just the constant. Let me rewrite this a little bit. So e to the
ln five times x is the same thing as e to the ln five to the x power, just like before,
because the exponent rules say, when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponent,
and remember, is the LL five, it's just a fancy way of writing five. So I've got five
to the x times ln five as the derivative with respect to x of five to the x. The same argument
works not just for a base five exponential function, but for any base exponential function.
So if I take the respect to x of A to the X for any number A, I'm going to get a to the x times ln A. Now, you might be wondering,
what if I use the same roll on our old favorite e to the x. So our base here is E. That means
I should get e to the x times ln e? Wait a sec, ln E, that's log base e of E, that's
asking what power? Do I raise II today get he? Well, the answer there is one. And so
the derivative respect to x of e to the x by this new rule we have is e to the x, it
agrees with our old rule. I want to draw your attention to the difference between two expressions.
And the first expression, dy dx of a to the x, the variable that we're taking the derivative
with respect to is in the exponent. So for this exponential function, or we use the derivative
rule that we just found, dy dx of a dx is eight of the x times ln A. On the other hand,
if we take respect to x of x to the A, where the variable x that we're taking the derivative
with respect to is in the base, then we don't need this exponential rule. In fact, it doesn't
even apply, although we have here is the power rule, right? dy dx of x cubed would be 3x
squared dy dx of x to the seventh would be 7x to the sixth and enjoy Add x of x to the
a is just a times x to the A minus one by the power role. So it's important to pay attention
to where the variable is when you're taking a derivative. In this video, we found that
the derivative with respect to x of five to the x is given by ln five times five to the
x. And in general, the derivative of respect to x of A to the X is going to be ln a times
a to the x. This gives us a general formula for the derivative of exponential functions.
The main goal of this video is to figure out the derivatives of logarithmic functions,
functions like y equals ln x, or y equals log base A x for any positive base a, I want
to find the derivative of log base a of x. In other words, I want to find the derivative
of y, where y is log base a of x. By the definition of logarithms, log base a of x equals y means
that a to the Y power is equal to x. And that's useful because now I can take the derivative
of both sides and use implicit differentiation. Recall of the derivative of a to the power
is ln A times A to the power. But since why we're thinking of as a function of x, I have
to multiply that by dou y dx by the chain rule. The right hand side here is just one.
Solving for dydx, I get one over ln A times A to the Y. But since age the y is equal to
x, I can rewrite that as the y dx equals one over ln A times x. So the derivative of log
base a of x for any base a is one over ln of A times x. And in particular, the derivative
of natural log of x is one over ln of E times x. But since ln of E is just one, that saying
that the derivative of ln x is one over x, this is a very handy fact. And this more general
derivative is also worth memorizing. While we're talking about the derivative of the
natural log of x, let's look at the derivative of the natural log of the absolute value of
x. The function y equals ln of absolute value of x is of course closely related to the function
y equals ln of x, the difference being that the domain for ln x is just x values greater
than zero, whereas the domain of ln of absolute value of x is all X's not equal to zero. The
graphs are also related. When you look at the graph of y equals ln absolute value of
x, it looks like you're seeing double since the absolute value of x is equal to x, when
x is greater than or equal to zero and negative x when x is less than zero, ln of the absolute
value of x is going to be equal to ln x when x is greater than or equal to zero, and ln
of negative x when x is less than zero. If I consider the derivative of ln of absolute
value of x, I can think of taking the derivative of each piece separately. We just saw that
the derivative of ln x is one over x. So the derivative of ln of minus x is going to be
one over minus x times the derivative of minus x, which is minus one by the chain rule. Notice
that this second expression simplifies to one over x. So the derivative of ln of absolute
value of x is equal to one over x, whether x is positive or negative. This formula will
come in handy later when we start doing integrals. In this video, we found that the derivative
of ln x is equal to one over x, kind of a nice derivative. And more generally, the derivative
of log base a of x is one over ln A times x. We've seen previously that the derivative
of x to a constant A is equal to a times x to the A minus one. This is the power rule.
We've also seen that the derivative of a positive number a raised to the x power is equal to
ln A times A to the X So we know how to take the derivative when the variable x is in the
base, or when it's in the exponent. But what if the variables in both the base and the
exponent, how do we take the derivative of x to the x. To differentiate functions like
this, we'll need to use the technique of logarithmic differentiation. To find the derivative of
x to the x, I'm going to set y equal to x to the x. Now we want to find dy dx. Since
we don't know how to compute dydx directly, so let's take the natural log of both sides.
taking the log is often a handy trick when you have a variable in the exponent that you
don't know how to deal with, because the properties of logs allow us to bring that exponent down
and multiply it. Now we have y implicitly defined in terms of x, so let's use implicit
differentiation, we'll take the derivative of both sides with respect to x. And now we
should have no trouble taking the derivatives because we've gotten rid of the awkward exponential
expression. So the derivative on the left of ln y is one over y times dy dx. And the
derivative on the right using the product rule is x times one over x plus one times
ln x. a to the x times ln A. Now, you might be wondering,
what if I use the same roll on our old favorite e to the x. So our base here is E. That means
I should get e to the x times ln e? Wait a sec, ln E, that's log base e of E, that's
asking what power? Do I raise II today get he? Well, the answer there is one. And so
the derivative respect to x of e to the x by this new rule we have is e to the x, it
agrees with our old rule. I want to draw your attention to the difference between two expressions.
And the first expression, dy dx of a to the x, the variable that we're taking the derivative
with respect to is in the exponent. So for this exponential function, or we use the derivative
rule that we just found, dy dx of a dx is eight of the x times ln A. On the other hand,
if we take respect to x of x to the A, where the variable x that we're taking the derivative
with respect to is in the base, then we don't need this exponential rule. In fact, it doesn't
even apply, although we have here is the power rule, right? dy dx of x cubed would be 3x
squared dy dx of x to the seventh would be 7x to the sixth and enjoy Add x of x to the
a is just a times x to the A minus one by the power role. So it's important to pay attention
to where the variable is when you're taking a derivative. In this video, we found that
the derivative with respect to x of five to the x is given by ln five times five to the
x. And in general, the derivative of respect to x of A to the X is going to be ln a times
a to the x. This gives us a general formula for the derivative of exponential functions.
The main goal of this video is to figure out the derivatives of logarithmic functions,
functions like y equals ln x, or y equals log base A x for any positive base a, I want
to find the derivative of log base a of x. In other words, I want to find the derivative
of y, where y is log base a of x. By the definition of logarithms, log base a of x equals y means
that a to the Y power is equal to x. And that's useful because now I can take the derivative
of both sides and use implicit differentiation. Recall of the derivative of a to the power
is ln A times A to the power. But since why we're thinking of as a function of x, I have
to multiply that by dou y dx by the chain rule. The right hand side here is just one.
Solving for dydx, I get one over ln A times A to the Y. But since age the y is equal to
x, I can rewrite that as the y dx equals one over ln A times x. So the derivative of log
base a of x for any base a is one over ln of A times x. And in particular, the derivative
of natural log of x is one over ln of E times x. But since ln of E is just one, that saying
that the derivative of ln x is one over x, this is a very handy fact. And this more general
derivative is also worth memorizing. While we're talking about the derivative of the
natural log of x, let's look at the derivative of the natural log of the absolute value of
x. The function y equals ln of absolute value of x is of course closely related to the function
y equals ln of x, the difference being that the domain for ln x is just x values greater
than zero, whereas the domain of ln of absolute value of x is all X's not equal to zero. The
graphs are also related. When you look at the graph of y equals ln absolute value of
x, it looks like you're seeing double since the absolute value of x is equal to x, when
x is greater than or equal to zero and negative x when x is less than zero, ln of the absolute
value of x is going to be equal to ln x when x is greater than or equal to zero, and ln
of negative x when x is less than zero. If I consider the derivative of ln of absolute
value of x, I can think of taking the derivative of each piece separately. We just saw that
the derivative of ln x is one over x. So the derivative of ln of minus x is going to be
one over minus x times the derivative of minus x, which is minus one by the chain rule. Notice
that this second expression simplifies to one over x. So the derivative of ln of absolute
value of x is equal to one over x, whether x is positive or negative. This formula will
come in handy later when we start doing integrals. In this video, we found that the derivative
of ln x is equal to one over x, kind of a nice derivative. And more generally, the derivative
of log base a of x is one over ln A times x. We've seen previously that the derivative
of x to a constant A is equal to a times x to the A minus one. This is the power rule.
We've also seen that the derivative of a positive number a raised to the x power is equal to
ln A times A to the X So we know how to take the derivative when the variable x is in the
base, or when it's in the exponent. But what if the variables in both the base and the
exponent, how do we take the derivative of x to the x. To differentiate functions like
this, we'll need to use the technique of logarithmic differentiation. To find the derivative of
x to the x, I'm going to set y equal to x to the x. Now we want to find dy dx. Since
we don't know how to compute dydx directly, so let's take the natural log of both sides.
taking the log is often a handy trick when you have a variable in the exponent that you
don't know how to deal with, because the properties of logs allow us to bring that exponent down
and multiply it. Now we have y implicitly defined in terms of x, so let's use implicit
differentiation, we'll take the derivative of both sides with respect to x. And now we
should have no trouble taking the derivatives because we've gotten rid of the awkward exponential
expression. So the derivative on the left of ln y is one over y times dy dx. And the
derivative on the right using the product rule is x times one over x plus one times
ln x. This simplifies to one over y d y dx equals
one plus ln x. So D y dX is going to equal y times one plus ln x. and replacing y with
x to the x, I have dy dx is x to the x times one plus ln x. This technique of taking the
log of both sides differentiating and solving for dydx is known as logarithmic differentiation.
And it's enormously useful whenever you have variables in both the base and the exponent.
Here's another example where our variable is in both the base and the exponent. So as
before, I'm going to set y equal to the expression that I want to differentiate and compute dydx.
First, I'll take the log of both sides. Use my log rules to bring my exponent down and
multiply it and take the derivative of both sides with respect to x. On the left, I get
one over y d y dx. And on the right, I get one of our x times the derivative of ln tangent
x, which is one over tangent x times the derivative of tangent x, or secant squared x, continuing
with the product rule, and didn't take the derivative of one of our x, that's going to
be the derivative of x to the minus one, which is minus one times x to the minus This simplifies to one over y d y dx equals
one plus ln x. So D y dX is going to equal y times one plus ln x. and replacing y with
x to the x, I have dy dx is x to the x times one plus ln x. This technique of taking the
log of both sides differentiating and solving for dydx is known as logarithmic differentiation.
And it's enormously useful whenever you have variables in both the base and the exponent.
Here's another example where our variable is in both the base and the exponent. So as
before, I'm going to set y equal to the expression that I want to differentiate and compute dydx.
First, I'll take the log of both sides. Use my log rules to bring my exponent down and
multiply it and take the derivative of both sides with respect to x. On the left, I get
one over y d y dx. And on the right, I get one of our x times the derivative of ln tangent
x, which is one over tangent x times the derivative of tangent x, or secant squared x, continuing
with the product rule, and didn't take the derivative of one of our x, that's going to
be the derivative of x to the minus one, which is minus one times x to the minus two two times ln tangent of x. Simplifying the right
hand side, I get one over x times one over sine x over cosine x times one over cosine
squared x minus ln 10x over x squared. rewriting, I can flip and multiply to get one over x
times cosine x over sine x times one over cosine squared x minus the second term, canceling
one copy of cosine and rewriting in terms of cosecant and secant, I get this expression,
I still have to solve for dy dx. times ln tangent of x. Simplifying the right
hand side, I get one over x times one over sine x over cosine x times one over cosine
squared x minus ln 10x over x squared. rewriting, I can flip and multiply to get one over x
times cosine x over sine x times one over cosine squared x minus the second term, canceling
one copy of cosine and rewriting in terms of cosecant and secant, I get this expression,
I still have to solve for dy dx. So multiplying both sides by y, I get the
following. And since y was equal to 10x to the one over x, I can rewrite everything in
terms of x. The technique of logarithmic differentiation is most useful when taking the derivative
of an expression that has a variable in both the base and the exponent, like in this example,
but sometimes it's also handy just as a way to take the derivative of a complicated product
and quotient like in this example. Now, we could take the derivative here just by using
the quotient rule on the product rule, but it's a little easier to take the log of both
sides. And the reason is that when we take the log of a product, we get a sum and the
log of a quotient is a difference and sums and quotients are a lot easier to deal with.
So in this example, the log of y is equal to ln of x plus ln of cosine of x minus ln
of x squared plus x to the fifth power, I can even bring that fifth power down, because
that's another one of my log roles. Now, it's much more straightforward to take the log
of both sides. On the left, I have one over y dydx, as usual, and on the right, the derivative
of ln x is one over x, the derivative of ln cosine x is one over cosine of x times negative
sine of x. And the derivative of ln x squared plus x is one over x squared plus x times
2x plus one. I'll solve for dydx and get y times one over x minus sine x over cosine
x, that's the same as tangent x minus five times 2x plus one over x squared plus x. Now
I can just rewrite y in terms of x and I'll be done. Again, I didn't have to use logarithmic
differentiation. To find this derivative, I could have just used the product rule in
the quotient rule, but logarithmic differentiation made it computationally much easier. In this
video, we learned how to take the derivative of expressions that have a variable both in
the base and in the exponent. And the idea was first to set y equal to the expression
we want to derive. Next, to take the natural log of both sides. Next, to derive both sides.
And finally, to solve for dy dx. This process is called logarithmic differentiation. The
inverse of a function undoes what the function does, so the inverse of tying your shoes would
be to untie them. And the inverse of the function that adds two to a number would be the function
that subtracts two from a number. This video introduces inverses and their properties.
Suppose f of x is the function defined by this chart. In other words, f of two is three,
f of three is five, f of four is six, and f of five is one, the inverse function for
F written f superscript. Negative 1x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to three, F
inverse takes three back to two. So we write this f superscript, negative one of three
is two. Similarly, since f takes three to five, F inverse takes five to three. And since
f takes four to six, f inverse of six is four. And since f takes five to one, f inverse of
one is five. I'll use these numbers to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart of values
when y equals f of x and the chart of values when y equals f inverse of x are closely related.
They share the same numbers, but the x values for f of x correspond to the y values for
f inverse of x, and the y values for f of x correspond to the x values for f inverse
of x. That leads us to the first key fact inverse functions reverse the roles of y and
x. I'm going to plot the points for y equals f of x in blue. So multiplying both sides by y, I get the
following. And since y was equal to 10x to the one over x, I can rewrite everything in
terms of x. The technique of logarithmic differentiation is most useful when taking the derivative
of an expression that has a variable in both the base and the exponent, like in this example,
but sometimes it's also handy just as a way to take the derivative of a complicated product
and quotient like in this example. Now, we could take the derivative here just by using
the quotient rule on the product rule, but it's a little easier to take the log of both
sides. And the reason is that when we take the log of a product, we get a sum and the
log of a quotient is a difference and sums and quotients are a lot easier to deal with.
So in this example, the log of y is equal to ln of x plus ln of cosine of x minus ln
of x squared plus x to the fifth power, I can even bring that fifth power down, because
that's another one of my log roles. Now, it's much more straightforward to take the log
of both sides. On the left, I have one over y dydx, as usual, and on the right, the derivative
of ln x is one over x, the derivative of ln cosine x is one over cosine of x times negative
sine of x. And the derivative of ln x squared plus x is one over x squared plus x times
2x plus one. I'll solve for dydx and get y times one over x minus sine x over cosine
x, that's the same as tangent x minus five times 2x plus one over x squared plus x. Now
I can just rewrite y in terms of x and I'll be done. Again, I didn't have to use logarithmic
differentiation. To find this derivative, I could have just used the product rule in
the quotient rule, but logarithmic differentiation made it computationally much easier. In this
video, we learned how to take the derivative of expressions that have a variable both in
the base and in the exponent. And the idea was first to set y equal to the expression
we want to derive. Next, to take the natural log of both sides. Next, to derive both sides.
And finally, to solve for dy dx. This process is called logarithmic differentiation. The
inverse of a function undoes what the function does, so the inverse of tying your shoes would
be to untie them. And the inverse of the function that adds two to a number would be the function
that subtracts two from a number. This video introduces inverses and their properties.
Suppose f of x is the function defined by this chart. In other words, f of two is three,
f of three is five, f of four is six, and f of five is one, the inverse function for
F written f superscript. Negative 1x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to three, F
inverse takes three back to two. So we write this f superscript, negative one of three
is two. Similarly, since f takes three to five, F inverse takes five to three. And since
f takes four to six, f inverse of six is four. And since f takes five to one, f inverse of
one is five. I'll use these numbers to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart of values
when y equals f of x and the chart of values when y equals f inverse of x are closely related.
They share the same numbers, but the x values for f of x correspond to the y values for
f inverse of x, and the y values for f of x correspond to the x values for f inverse
of x. That leads us to the first key fact inverse functions reverse the roles of y and
x. I'm going to plot the points for y equals f of x in blue. Next, I'll plot the points for y equals f
inverse of x in red. Pause the video for a moment and see what kind of symmetry you observe
in this graph. How are the blue points related to the red points, you might have noticed
that the blue points and the red points are mirror images over the mirror line, y equals
x. So our second key fact is that the graph of y equals f inverse of x can be obtained
from the graph of y equals f of x by reflecting over the line y equals x. This makes sense,
because inverses, reverse the roles of y and x. In the same example, let's compute f inverse
of f of two. This open circle means composition. In other words, we're computing f inverse
of f of two. We compute this from the inside out. So that's f inverse of three. Since F
of two is three, and f inverse of three, we see is two. Similarly, we can compute f of
f inverse of three. And that means we take f of f inverse of three. Since f inverse of
three is two, that's the same thing as computing F of two, which is three. Please pause the
video for a moment and compute these other compositions. You should have found that in
every case, if you take f inverse of f of a number, you get back to the very same number
you started with. And similarly, if you take f of f inverse of any number, you get back
to the same number you started with. So in general, f inverse of f of x is equal to x,
and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This is the mathematical way of saying that
F and envir f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different example. Suppose that
f of x is x cubed. Pause the video for a moment and guess what the inverse of f should be?
Remember, F inverse undoes the work that F does. You might have guessed that f inverse
of x is going to be the cube root function. And we can check that this is true by looking
at f of f inverse of x, that's F of the cube root of function, which means the cube root
function cubed, which gets us back to x. Similarly, if we compute f inverse of f of x, that's
the cube root of x cubed. And we get back to excellence again. So the cube root function
really is the inverse of the cubing function. When we compose the two functions, we get
back to the number that we started with. It'd be nice to have a more systematic way of finding
inverses of functions besides guessing and checking. One method uses the fact that inverses,
reverse the roles of y and x. So if we want to find the inverse of the function, f of
x equals five minus x over 3x, we can write it as y equals five minus x over 3x. Reverse
the roles of y and x to get x equals five minus y over three y, and then solve for y.
To solve for y, let's multiply both sides by three y. Bring all terms with wisened to
the left side, and alternans without y's and then to the right side, factor out the y and
divide to isolate y. This gives us f inverse of x as five over 3x plus one. Notice that
our original function f and our inverse function, f inverse are both rational functions, but
they're not the reciprocals of each other. And then General, f inverse of x is not usually
equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because when we write two to the minus one,
that does mean one of our two, but f to the minus one of x means the inverse function
and not the reciprocal. It's natural to ask if all functions have inverse functions, that
is for any function you might encounter. Is there always a function that it is its inverse? Next, I'll plot the points for y equals f
inverse of x in red. Pause the video for a moment and see what kind of symmetry you observe
in this graph. How are the blue points related to the red points, you might have noticed
that the blue points and the red points are mirror images over the mirror line, y equals
x. So our second key fact is that the graph of y equals f inverse of x can be obtained
from the graph of y equals f of x by reflecting over the line y equals x. This makes sense,
because inverses, reverse the roles of y and x. In the same example, let's compute f inverse
of f of two. This open circle means composition. In other words, we're computing f inverse
of f of two. We compute this from the inside out. So that's f inverse of three. Since F
of two is three, and f inverse of three, we see is two. Similarly, we can compute f of
f inverse of three. And that means we take f of f inverse of three. Since f inverse of
three is two, that's the same thing as computing F of two, which is three. Please pause the
video for a moment and compute these other compositions. You should have found that in
every case, if you take f inverse of f of a number, you get back to the very same number
you started with. And similarly, if you take f of f inverse of any number, you get back
to the same number you started with. So in general, f inverse of f of x is equal to x,
and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This is the mathematical way of saying that
F and envir f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different example. Suppose that
f of x is x cubed. Pause the video for a moment and guess what the inverse of f should be?
Remember, F inverse undoes the work that F does. You might have guessed that f inverse
of x is going to be the cube root function. And we can check that this is true by looking
at f of f inverse of x, that's F of the cube root of function, which means the cube root
function cubed, which gets us back to x. Similarly, if we compute f inverse of f of x, that's
the cube root of x cubed. And we get back to excellence again. So the cube root function
really is the inverse of the cubing function. When we compose the two functions, we get
back to the number that we started with. It'd be nice to have a more systematic way of finding
inverses of functions besides guessing and checking. One method uses the fact that inverses,
reverse the roles of y and x. So if we want to find the inverse of the function, f of
x equals five minus x over 3x, we can write it as y equals five minus x over 3x. Reverse
the roles of y and x to get x equals five minus y over three y, and then solve for y.
To solve for y, let's multiply both sides by three y. Bring all terms with wisened to
the left side, and alternans without y's and then to the right side, factor out the y and
divide to isolate y. This gives us f inverse of x as five over 3x plus one. Notice that
our original function f and our inverse function, f inverse are both rational functions, but
they're not the reciprocals of each other. And then General, f inverse of x is not usually
equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because when we write two to the minus one,
that does mean one of our two, but f to the minus one of x means the inverse function
and not the reciprocal. It's natural to ask if all functions have inverse functions, that
is for any function you might encounter. Is there always a function that it is its inverse? In fact, the answer is no. See, if you can
come up with an example of a function that does not have an inverse function. The word
function here is key. Remember that a function is a relationship between x values and y values,
such that for each x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value. One
example of a function that does not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals
x squared. To see that, the inverse of this function is not a function. Note that for
the x squared function, the number two and the number negative two, both go to number
four. So if I had an inverse, he would have to send four to both two and negative two.
The inverse would not be a function, it might be easier to understand the problem, when
you look at a graph of y equals x squared. Recall that inverse functions reverse the
roles of y and x and flip the graph over the line y equals x. But when I flipped the green
graph over the line y equals x, I get this red graph. This red graph is not the graph
of a function, because it violates the vertical line test. The reason that violates the vertical
line test is because the original green function violates the horizontal line test, and has
2x values with the same y value. In general, a function f has an inverse function if and
only if the graph of f satisfies the horizontal line test, ie every horizontal line intersects
the graph. In most one point, pause the video for a moment and see which of these four graphs
satisfy the horizontal line test. In other words, which of the four corresponding functions
would have an inverse function, you may have found that graphs A and B, violate the horizontal
line test. So their functions would not have inverse functions. But graph C and D satisfy
the horizontal line test. So these graphs represent functions that do have inverses.
functions that satisfy the horizontal line test are sometimes called One to One functions.
Equivalent way of function is one to one, if for any two different x values, x one and
x two, the y value is f of x one and f of x two are different numbers. Sometimes, as
I said, f is one to one, if, whenever f of x one is equal to f of x two, then x one has
to equal x two. As our last example, let's try to find P inverse of x, where p of x is
the square root of x minus two drawn here. If we graph P inverse on the same axis as
p of x, we get the following graph, simply by flipping over the line y equals x. If we
try to solve the problem, algebraically, we can write y equal to a squared of x minus
two, reverse the roles of y and x and solve for y by squaring both sides and adding two.
Now if we were to graph y equals x squared plus two, that would look like a parabola,
it would look like the red graph was already drawn together with another arm on the left
side. But we know that our actual inverse function consists only of this right arm,
we can specify this algebraically by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than
or equal to zero. This corresponds to the fact that on the original graph, for the square
root of x, y was only greater than or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain
and range of P and P inverse, we know that the domain of P is all values of x such that
x minus two is greater than or equal to zero. Since we can't take the square root of a negative
number. This corresponds to x values being greater than or equal to two, or an interval
notation, the interval from two to infinity. The range of P, we can see from the graph
is our y value is greater than or equal to zero, or the interval from zero to infinity. In fact, the answer is no. See, if you can
come up with an example of a function that does not have an inverse function. The word
function here is key. Remember that a function is a relationship between x values and y values,
such that for each x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value. One
example of a function that does not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals
x squared. To see that, the inverse of this function is not a function. Note that for
the x squared function, the number two and the number negative two, both go to number
four. So if I had an inverse, he would have to send four to both two and negative two.
The inverse would not be a function, it might be easier to understand the problem, when
you look at a graph of y equals x squared. Recall that inverse functions reverse the
roles of y and x and flip the graph over the line y equals x. But when I flipped the green
graph over the line y equals x, I get this red graph. This red graph is not the graph
of a function, because it violates the vertical line test. The reason that violates the vertical
line test is because the original green function violates the horizontal line test, and has
2x values with the same y value. In general, a function f has an inverse function if and
only if the graph of f satisfies the horizontal line test, ie every horizontal line intersects
the graph. In most one point, pause the video for a moment and see which of these four graphs
satisfy the horizontal line test. In other words, which of the four corresponding functions
would have an inverse function, you may have found that graphs A and B, violate the horizontal
line test. So their functions would not have inverse functions. But graph C and D satisfy
the horizontal line test. So these graphs represent functions that do have inverses.
functions that satisfy the horizontal line test are sometimes called One to One functions.
Equivalent way of function is one to one, if for any two different x values, x one and
x two, the y value is f of x one and f of x two are different numbers. Sometimes, as
I said, f is one to one, if, whenever f of x one is equal to f of x two, then x one has
to equal x two. As our last example, let's try to find P inverse of x, where p of x is
the square root of x minus two drawn here. If we graph P inverse on the same axis as
p of x, we get the following graph, simply by flipping over the line y equals x. If we
try to solve the problem, algebraically, we can write y equal to a squared of x minus
two, reverse the roles of y and x and solve for y by squaring both sides and adding two.
Now if we were to graph y equals x squared plus two, that would look like a parabola,
it would look like the red graph was already drawn together with another arm on the left
side. But we know that our actual inverse function consists only of this right arm,
we can specify this algebraically by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than
or equal to zero. This corresponds to the fact that on the original graph, for the square
root of x, y was only greater than or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain
and range of P and P inverse, we know that the domain of P is all values of x such that
x minus two is greater than or equal to zero. Since we can't take the square root of a negative
number. This corresponds to x values being greater than or equal to two, or an interval
notation, the interval from two to infinity. The range of P, we can see from the graph
is our y value is greater than or equal to zero, or the interval from zero to infinity. Similarly, based on the graph, we see the
domain of P inverse is x values greater than or equal to zero, the interval from zero to
infinity. And the range of P inverse is Y values greater than or equal to two, or the
interval from two to infinity. If you look closely at these domains and ranges, you'll
notice that the domain of P corresponds exactly to the range of P inverse, and the range of
P corresponds to the domain of P inverse. This makes sense because inverse functions
reverse the roles of y and x. The domain of f inverse of x is the x values for F inverse,
which corresponds to the y values or the range of F. The range of f inverse is the y values
for F inverse, which correspond to the x values or the domain of f. In this video, we discussed Similarly, based on the graph, we see the
domain of P inverse is x values greater than or equal to zero, the interval from zero to
infinity. And the range of P inverse is Y values greater than or equal to two, or the
interval from two to infinity. If you look closely at these domains and ranges, you'll
notice that the domain of P corresponds exactly to the range of P inverse, and the range of
P corresponds to the domain of P inverse. This makes sense because inverse functions
reverse the roles of y and x. The domain of f inverse of x is the x values for F inverse,
which corresponds to the y values or the range of F. The range of f inverse is the y values
for F inverse, which correspond to the x values or the domain of f. In this video, we discussed five key properties of inverse functions.
inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x. The graph of y equals f inverse of x is
the graph of y equals f of x reflected over the line y equals x. When we compose F with
F inverse, we get the identity function y equals x. And similarly, when we compose f
inverse with F, that brings x to x. In other words, F and F inverse undo each other. The
function f of x has an inverse function if and only if the graph of y equals f of x satisfies
the horizontal line test. And finally, the domain of f is the range of f inverse. And
the range of f is the domain of f inverse. These properties of inverse functions will
be important when we study exponential functions and their inverses logarithmic functions.
This video defines the standard inverse trig functions, sine inverse cosine inverse and
tan inverse. In this crazy looking graph, please focus first on the thin black line.
This is a graph of y equals sine x. The graph of the inverse of a function can be found
by flipping the graph of the original function over the line y equals x. I've drawn the flipped
graph with this blue dotted line. But you'll notice that the blue dotted line is not the
graph of a function, because it violates the vertical line test. So in order to get a function,
that's the inverse of y equals sine x, we need to restrict the domain of sine of x,
we'll restrict it to this piece that's drawn with a thick black line. If I invert that
piece, by flipping it over the line y equals x, I get the piece drawn with a red dotted
line here. And that piece does satisfy the vertical line test. So it is in fact a function.
of the regular sine x has domain from negative infinity to infinity, or restricted sine x
has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two. It's it's range is still from negative
one to one, just like the regular sine x. Because I've taken the biggest possible piece
of the graph whose flipped version is still a function. The inverse sine function is often
written as arc sine of x. And since inverting a function reverses the roles of y at x, it
reverses the domain and the range. So arc sine of x, the inverse function has domain
from negative one to one, and range from negative pi over two to pi over two, which seems plausible
from the graph. Now an inverse function undoes the work of a function. So if the function
sine takes angle theta, two numbers, x, then the inverse sine, or arc sine takes numbers
x, two angles theta. For example, since sine of pi over two is one, arc sine of one is
pi over two. And in general, the output of arc sine of x is the angle between negative
pi over two and pi over two whose side is x. y is equal to arc sine x means that x is
equal to sine of y. But since there are many angles, y who sine is x, right, they all differ
by multiples of two pi. We specify also, that y is between negative pi over two and pi over
two. That was the whole point of doing this domain restriction in order to get a well
defined inverse value. There's an alternate notation for inverse sine. Sometimes it's
written as sine to the negative one of x. But this notation can be confusing, so be
careful. In particular, sine to the negative one of x does not equal one over sine of x. One over sine of x the reciprocal function
is another word for cosecant The backs, but sign to the negative one of x is another word
for arc sine of x, the inverse sine function, which is not the same thing as the reciprocal
function. Let's go through the same process to build an inverse cosine function, we start
with a graph of cosine of x, we flip it over the line y equals x to get the blue dotted
line. But the blue dotted line is not a function. So we go back and restrict the domain for
our original cosine of x to just be between zero and pi. The resulting red graph now satisfies
the vertical line test. So it's a proper inverse function. Our restricted cosine has domain
from zero to pi, and range from negative one to one. And so our inverse function, arc cosine
has domain from negative one to one, and range from zero to pi. Since cosine takes us from
angles to numbers, arc cosine takes us from numbers back to angles. For example, cosine
of pi over four is the square root of two over two. So arc cosine of the square root
of two over two is equal to pi over four. arc cosine of x is the angle between zero
and pi, whose cosine is x. In other words, y equals r cosine of x means that x is equal
to cosine of y, and y is between zero and pi. Since otherwise, there'd be lots of possible
answers for an angle y whose cosine is x. The alternative notation for arc cosine is
cosine inverse. And again, we have to be careful. cosine to the negative 1x is not the same
thing as one over cosine of x. one over cosine of x is also called secant of x. cosine to
the negative 1x means arc cosine, the inverse function, and these two things are not the
same. Finally, let's look take a look at inverse tangent function. Here's a graph of tangent
and black, these vertical lines aren't really part of the function, they're just vertical
asymptotes. So in order to get actual function, when we flip over the line y equals x, we
take just one piece of the tangent function. Here we've taken the piece marked in black,
we flip that over the line y equals x, we get this piece in red, which is actually a
function because it satisfies the vertical line test. Now, you might ask, would it be
possible to pick a different piece of the tangent function to invert? And the answer
is yes, we could do that. And on another planet, maybe mathematicians do that. But on our planet,
we use the convention that we pick this piece of tangent to invert, which is kind of a convenient
choice since it's centered here around the origin. In the previous two examples, our
choice of restricted domain for sine and for cosine was also a convention that led to a
conveniently defined inverse function. In any case, based on our choice, our restricted
tan function has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two. We don't include the endpoints
in that interval, because our restricted tan function has vertical asymptotes, that negative
pi over two pi over two, so it's not defined there. The range of our restricted tan function
is from negative infinity to infinity. Therefore, arc tan of X has domain from negative infinity
to infinity and range from negative pi over two to pi over two. Once again, tangent is
taking us from angles to numbers. So arc tan is taking us from numbers to angles. For example,
tangent of pi over four is one, and therefore, arc tan of one is pi over four. So arc tan
of x means the angle between negative pi over two and pi over two whose tangent is x. y is equal to arc tan x means that x is equal
to tangent of y and the Why is between negative pi over two and pi over two. The inverse tan
function can also be written as 10 to the minus one of x. And once again, tan inverse
of x means the inverse trig function, arc tan of x. And it's not equal to one over tan
of x, which is called cotangent of x. And that's all for this video on the three basic
inverse trig functions. sine inverse x, also known as arc sine of x, cosine inverse x,
also known as arc cosine x, and tan inverse x, also known as arc tan x. In this video,
we'll use implicit differentiation to find the derivatives of the inverse trig functions.
First, the inverse sine function. Recall that y equals sine inverse of x means that y is
the angle in radians whose sine is x. In other words, we can write x equals sine of y as
an almost equivalent statements, I say almost equivalent, because there are lots of different
y's whose side is x, lots of different angles can have the same resulting side. And for
the inverse sine function, we specify that that angle y has to be between pi over two
and negative pi over two, that's just the convention. Be careful not to mistake sine
inverse of x, which is an inverse function, and one over sine x, which is a reciprocal
function. These are not the same thing. This negative one does not mean reciprocal here,
it means inverse function. There is another notation for inverse sine, which is arc sine.
So arc sine of x is the same thing as sine inverse of x, we want to find the derivative
of sine inverse of x, in other words, the derivative of y with respect to x, where y
is sine inverse of x, I'm going to rewrite this equation here as x equals sine y, and
then use implicit differentiation. So taking the derivative of both sides with respect
to x, I have derivative of x is equal to the derivative of sine y. In other words, one
is equal to cosine of y times dy dx. Solving for dydx, I have that dydx is one over cosine
of y. Now I found the derivative, but it's not in a super useful form, because there's
still a Y and expression, I'd rather have it all in terms of x. Well, I could rewrite
this as dy dx is one over cosine of sine inverse of x, since after all, y is equal to sine
inverse of x, but that's still not a super useful form, because it's difficult to evaluate
this. So instead of doing this, I'm going to look at a right triangle. I want to label
my triangle with y and x. Since y is my angle, I'll put it here. And since sine of y is x,
and sine is opposite over hypotenuse, I can label my opposite side with x and my hypothesis
with one. From this, I can figure out the length of my remaining side, it's going to
have to be the square root of one minus x squared by the Pythagorean Theorem. Now I
can compute cosine of y just from the triangle. Cosine of y is adjacent overhype hotness,
so that's the square root of one minus x squared over one, or just the square root of one minus
x squared. I've been implicitly assuming that y is a positive angle between zero and pi
over two when I've been drawing this triangle, but you can check that the same formula also
works. If y is a negative angle, think of it going down here on the unit circle instead
of up here. So now that I have a formula for cosine y
in terms of x, I can go back to my derivative and substitute and I get dy dx is one over
the square root of one minus x squared. In other words, I found a formula for With the
derivative of inverse sine of x, we can carry out a similar process to find the derivative
of inverse cosine y equals cosine inverse x means that x is equal to cosine of y. And
by convention, y lies between zero and pi. To find the derivative of arc cosine of x,
arc cosine is just an alternative notation for cosine inverse, I can write y equals arc
cosine of x, and equivalently x equals the cosine of y. And then I want to find dydx.
Using implicit differentiation, please pause the video and try it for yourself before going
on. So starting with the equation x equals cosine y, we're going to take the derivative
of both sides with respect to x. The derivative of x is one, and the derivative of cosine
y is negative sine y, dy dx. So d y dx is equal to negative one over sine y. As before,
I can draw and label a right triangle, the angle is y. And now I know that x is cosine
of y. So I'm going to put x on the adjacent side and one on my partner's leaving the square
root of one minus x squared on the opposite side, which means that sine of y, which is
opposite overhype hotness, is equal to the square root of one minus x squared. And so
dy dx is going to be negative one over the square root of one minus x squared. And I
have my formula for the derivative of arc cosine of x. inverse tangent can be handled
very similarly. And again, you may want to try it for yourself before watching the video.
Y equals inverse tangent of x means that x is tangent of y. And the convention is that
y is supposed to lie between negative pi over two and pi over two. Proceeding as before,
we write y equals our tan of x and x equals tan of y, take the derivative of both sides.
So we get one equals secant squared of y d y dx. Solving for dydx we have one over seacon
square root of y. And using our right triangle as before, we can label the angle of as y.
Since I know that tangent y is x, and tangent is opposite over adjacent, I'm going to label
the opposite side x and the adjacent side one, which gives us a hypothesis of the square
root of one plus x squared. Now we know that secant of y is one over cosine of y. So that's
going to be hi partners over adjacent. So that's the square root of one plus x squared
over one. And so secant squared of y is just the square of this, which is one plus x squared.
Now I can substitute into my formula for dy dx, and I get dy dx is one over one plus x
squared, which gives me a nice formula for the derivative of inverse tangent. The other
inverse trig functions cotesia inverse, seacon inverse and cosequin inverse, have derivatives
that can be computed. Similarly, the following table summarizes these results. In some books,
you may see absolute value signs around the X for the formulas for inverse secant and
inverse cosecant. Of course, when x is positive, this makes no difference. And when x is negative,
this discrepancy comes from differences in the convention for the range of y for these
inverse trig functions seeking inverse and cosecant numbers. Notice that the derivatives of the inverse
trig functions that start with CO, all have negative signs in front of them and are the
negatives of the corresponding inverse trig functions without the CO that makes it easier
to remember them. You should memorize these formulas. Let's do one example using the formulas
that we just found. Let's compute The derivative of tan inverse of A plus x over a minus x,
we'll want to use the formula for the derivative of tan inverse x. Now, to compute dydx, for
our function, we can use the chain rule, the outside function is tan inverse, whose derivative
is one over one plus the inside function squared, we'll need to multiply that by the derivative
of the inside function. I'll just copy over the first part and take the derivative of
a plus x over a minus x using the quotient rule. So I put the denominator on the bottom
and square it. And then I take low times d, hi, the derivative of a plus x with respect
to x is just one minus high D low, the derivative of a minus x with respect to x is negative
one. I'll simplify my numerator, a minus x, the negative one and the negative sign here
cancel, so I get plus a plus x. On the denominator, I have one plus a plus x squared over a minus
x squared, multiplied by a minus x squared. canceling in the numerator, I get to a and
distributing and the denominator I get a minus x squared plus a plus x squared. If I expand
out the denominator, the same simplifies to two a over two A squared plus 2x squared,
or just a over a squared plus x squared, which is a pretty nice derivative. So now you know
the derivatives of the inverse trig functions. And you also know how to find them using implicit
differentiation, if you ever forget them. When two or more quantities are related by
an equation, then their rates of change over time are also related. That's the idea behind
related rates. And this video gives an example of related rates involving distances. A tornado
is 20 miles west of us, heading due east towards Phillips Hall at a rate of 40 miles per hour.
you hop on your bike and ride due south at a speed of 12 miles per hour. How fast is
the distance between you and the tornado changing after 15 minutes. In a related rates problem,
it's always a good idea to draw a picture first, that can help you uncover the geometry
of the problem and see how quantities are related. In this problem, we have a right
triangle. Because the tornadoes traveling due east and the bicycles traveling due south
at right angles. Let's assign variables to the quantities of interest. I'll call the
distance between the tornado and Phillips Hall a. Although it starts at 20 miles, it
varies with time, and therefore it's a good idea to assign it a letter a variable. I'll
use B to refer to the distance between Philips Hall and the bicycle, a quantity that also
varies with time. And I'll let c stand for the distance between the tornado and the bicycle.
The problem asks us to find how fast this distance is changing. In other words, DC dt.
The next step is to write down equations that relate the quantities of interest. In this
problem, we know by the Pythagorean Theorem, that a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
We're interested in how fast the distance between you and the tornado is changing. That's
a rate of change. And the rate at which the bicycle is traveling and the tornado is moving.
These are also rates of change. In order to work these rates of change into the problem,
I'm going to take the derivative of both sides of this equation with respect to time. That's
the third step. So I'm going to take DDT of a squared plus b squared. And that's equal
to DDT of C squared. Notice that I'm thinking of a B and C as functions of T here, since
they vary over time, on the left side, I get to a times dA DT using the chain rule, plus two B DB dt. And on the right side, I
get to see DC dt. Now I can use the information given to me in the problem to plug in numbers
and solve for the quantity of interest DC DT since the tornado was moving at a rate
of 40 miles per hour The distance between the tornado and Philip's Hall is decreasing
at 40 miles per hour. In other words, da dt is negative 40. That negative sign is important
here, and comes from the fact that the distance is decreasing. Since the bicycle is moving
at 12 miles per hour, the distance between Philips Hall and the bicycle is increasing
at a rate of 12 miles per hour. So DBT is positive 12. The quantity is a, b and c are
constantly changing. But at the time of interest, t equals 15 minutes or in hours, 0.25 hours,
we can figure out what a B and C are. The tornado is starts 20 miles away, but it's
moving at a rate of 40 miles per hour. So after a quarter of an hour, it's gone 10 miles,
that means after a quarter of an hour, it's only 10 miles away. And so at the time of
point two, five hours, a equals 10. The bike is moving at 12 miles per hour. So after a
quarter of a mile, it's gone three miles. And so at this time, b equals three. Now using
the same equation we started with, we can plug in a and b and solve for C, we know that
c squared is going to be 10 squared plus three squared. So C is going to be the square root
of 109. Plugging in the numbers into this equation, we get two times 10 times negative
40 plus two times three times 12 equals two times the square root of 109 times DC dt.
So DC dt is going to be negative 800 plus 72 over two times a squared of 109, which
is approximately negative 35. In other words, the distance between the tornado and us is
decreasing at 35 miles per hour, the tornado is gaining on us quickly. These same steps will get you through a variety
of related rates problems. A couple of cautionary notes. Don't plug in numbers to send. Any
quantities that vary with time should be written as variables, so you can properly take the
derivative with respect to time. In addition, be careful to use negative numbers for negative
rates of change. That is, for quantities that are decreasing, we wouldn't have gotten the
right answer if we hadn't have used a negative 40 for the rate of change of the distance
here. In this video, we solved the related rates problem, and found that riding a bicycle
may not be the best way to escape a tornado. In this classic related rates problem, water's
flowing into a cone shaped tank, and we have to figure out how fast the water is rising.
Water flows into a tank at a rate of three cubic meters per minute, the tank is shaped
like a cone with a height of four meters, and a radius of five meters at the top, we're
supposed to find the rate at which the water level is rising in the tank. When the water
height is two meters. we've drawn our picture. Now let's label some quantities of interest.
It's fine to use numbers for the quantities that stay fixed throughout the problem. Like
the dimensions of the tank. For any quantities that are varying with time, I need to use
letters variables to represent those quantities. So the height of the water is varying throughout
the problem. I'll call that H. And it might be handy to also talk about the radius of
the part of the cone that's filled with water. I'll call that our ultimately I want to find
the rate at which the water level is rising. So that's DHD T. Next, I want to write down
equations that relate the quantities of interest. From geometry, I know that the volume of a
cone is 1/3 times the area of the base times the height. So the volume of water in the
cone is going to be 1/3 times pi r squared times h since h is the height of the piece
of the code that contains water. And pi r squared is the area of that circular base
for that piece of account. I'm calling it the base even though it's at the top. There's
one more equation that's going to be handy here that comes from similar triangles. From
similar triangles, we know the ratio of sides for the little triangle here is the same as
the ratio of sides for the big triangle. In other words, we know that our over h is going
to be equal to five over four. I can use this relationship to eliminate one of the variables
in this equation. Let's think for a minute which one we want to eliminate. Since we're
ultimately interested in finding DHD T, we need to keep the variable h in here. But since
we don't have any information about how are you changing, it's a good idea to get rid
of the R. So let's solve for r here. And we get r equals five fourths times h, and plug
that back into our volume equation. So we get v equals 1/3 pi times five fourths h squared
times h. Or in other words, V equals 25/48 pi h cubed. Now we're gonna derive both sides
of the equation with respect to time t, to get rates of change into the problem. Remember
that we're thinking of the volume of water and the height of water as functions of time
t, we get dv dt equals 2548. It's pi times three h squared DHD t. Now let's plug in numbers
and solve for the quantity of interest DHD T. From our problem, we know that water's
flowing into the tank at a rate of three cubic meters per minute. So dv dt is three, we're
asked to find the rate at which the water level is rising when the water height is two
meters. So that's when h is two. Plugging in those values and solving for a DHD T, we
get d h dt is equal to three divided by 2540. It's pi times three times two squared, which
is 12 over 25 pi meters per second, are about point one five meters per second. This video solve the related rates problem
involving volume, and use the trick of finding similar triangles to eliminate one variable.
In this video, we'll do a related rates problem involving rotation and angles. a lighthouse
that's half a mile west of shore, has a rotating light that makes two revolutions per minute
in the counterclockwise direction, the shore runs north south, and there's a cave directly
east of the lighthouse. How fast is the beam of light moving along the shore at a point
one mile north of the cave. we've drawn a picture. Now let's label it with variables
for all the quantities that are changing with time, the distance between the lighthouse
and the cave that's fixed. So we don't have to put a variable for that. But the distance
between the cave and the point on the shore where the light is hitting, that's varying.
So I'll call that say x. Since we want to know how fast the beam of light is moving,
we're going to want to know how that distance x is changing. In other words, we want to
calculate dx dt, when x is one. The high partners of this right triangle made by the beam of
light is also changing with time as as the angle here between the beam of light and the
East West line, I'll call that angle theta. And the angle up here, I suppose is also changing
and call that fee. This angle is the right angle between the East West line and the north
south line. So that doesn't change, it's always 90 degrees. Next, we want to write down equations
to relate the quantities of interest. Whenever I see a right triangle in a problem, I'm tempted
to write down the Pythagorean theorem, which in this case would say one half squared plus
x squared equals h squared. But in this particular problem, it doesn't look like that's going
to help us much because of a tiger in theory and would relate x and h. But we don't have
any information about how H is changing. The only rate of change information given to us
is this two revolutions per minute. Two revolutions per minute is indirectly telling us how this
angle theta is changing. Because if the light beam is making two revolutions per minute,
then since they're two pi radians in a revolution, that amounts to a change of four pi radians
per minute for the angle theta. Therefore I'd really like to write down the equation
that has to do with theta and x. And from trig, I know that tangent of theta is opposite
over adjacent. So I can write down tangent theta equals x divided by one half. Or in
other words, tangent theta is 2x. This is the equation that I need that relates x and
theta. Now I'm going to derive both sides with respect to time t. And I get second squared
theta, d theta dt equals two times dx dt. Next, I can plug in numbers and solve for
my quantity of interest, which is dx dt when x equals one. We already figured out from
the two revolutions per minute, that d theta dt is four pi. Now secant theta is one over
cosine theta. And since cosine theta is adjacent ever had partners, it's reciprocal is high
partners over adjacent. So in our picture, that gives us h over one half. Well, when
x equals one, H, is going to be the square root of one squared plus a half squared by
the Pythagorean Theorem. And we'll divide that by one half. And simplifying, we get
the square root of five fourths divided by one half, which ends up as the square root
of five. So let's plug these values into our equation involving derivatives. And we get
the square root of five squared per second squared times four pi, four d theta dt equals two times dx dt. Solving for dx dt,
we get dx dt is five times four pi divided by two, or 10 pi. So what are the units here
on dx dt, since our distance has been in miles, and our time is in minutes, this is 10 pi
miles per minute. If I want to convert this to more standard units of miles per hour,
I can just multiply my 10 pi miles per minute by 60 minutes per hour to get 600 pi miles
per hour. That works out to about 1885 miles per hour, which is pretty darn fast. In this
related rates problem, we related rotations per minute, to a change in angle per minute.
And we use the trig equation to relate angle and side length. solving a right triangle
means finding the length of all the sides and the measures of the angles given partial
information. In this example, we're given the length of one side and the measure of
one angle, plus we know the measure of this right angle is 90 degrees, we need to find
the measure of the third angle labeled capital A, and the length of the two sides labeled
lowercase b and lowercase C. To find the measure of angle A, let's use the fact that the measures
of the three angles of a triangle add up to 180 degrees. So that means that 49 degrees
plus 90 degrees plus a is equal to 180 degrees. So A is equal to 180 degrees minus 90 degrees
minus 49 degrees, which works out to 41 degrees. To find the length of the side D we have a
couple of possible options. We could use the fact that tan of 49 degrees, which is opposite
over adjacent is B over 23. So b is 23 times tan 49 degrees, which works out to 26.46 units.
Alternatively, we could use the fact that tan of 41 degrees is 23 over b since now if
we're looking at the angle here 23 is our opposite and B is an adjacent That's a little
bit harder to solve algebraically. But we can write B tan 41 degrees equals 23, which
means that B is 23 divided by tan 41 degrees. With a calculator that works out again to
26.46. The reason we want to use 10 in this problem and not say sine or cosine is because
10 of say 49 degrees relates, and the unknown side that we're looking for be to the side
that we know the measure of, if we had use sine instead, would be saying that sine of
49 is B over C, and we'd have two unknowns, which would make it difficult to solve. Next,
to find the side length C, we can have a few options, we could use a trig function again,
for example, we could use the cosine of 49 degrees, that's adjacent over hypotenuse,
which is 23 oversee. Solving for C, we get that C is 23 over cosine 49, which works out
to 35.06 units. Another option would be to use the Pythagorean Theorem to find C. Since
we know 23 squared plus b squared equals c squared. In other words, that's 23 squared
plus 26.46 squared equals c squared, which means that C is the square root of that song,
which works out again, to 35.06. To review, the ideas we used were, the sum of the angles
is equal to 180 degrees. We used facts like tangent of an angle being opposite over adjacent
and similar facts about sine and cosine. And we use the Pythagorean Theorem. This allowed
us to find all the angles and side lengths of the triangle, knowing just the side length
of one side and the angle of one of the non right angles to begin with. In this next example,
we don't know any of the angles except for the right angle, but we know to have the side
lengths. To find the unknown angle theta, we can use
the fact that cosine theta is adjacent overhype hotness, so that's 10 over 15. Cosine is a
good trig function to use here, because this equation relates our unknown angle to our
two known sides. So we just have one unknown in our equation to solve for. To solve for
theta, we just take the cosine inverse of 10/15, which is 0.8411 radians, or 48.19 degrees.
To find the measure of angle fee, we could use the fact that sine of fee is 10 over 15
and take sine inverse of 10/15. But probably a little easier, let's just use the fact that
these three angles do 180 degrees. That tells us that fee plus 90 plus 48.19 is equal to
180. Which means that fee is 41.81. Finally, we can find x either using a trig function,
or by using the Pythagorean Theorem. To find it using a trig function, we could write down
something like tan of 48.19 degrees is x over 10. To find that using the Tyrion theorem,
we'd write down 10 squared plus x squared equals 15 squared. I'll use a Pythagorean
theorem and find the x by doing the square root of 15 squared minus 10 squared. That
gives me an answer of 11.18. Notice that we use many of the same ideas as in the previous
problem. For example, the fact that the sum of the angles is 180. The Pythagorean theorem
and the trig functions like tan, sine and cosine, we also use the inverse trig functions
to get from an equation like this one to the angle. This video showed how it's possible
to find the length of all the sides of a right triangle, and the measures of all the angles
given partial information. For example, the measure of one angle and one side or from
two sides. This video gives some definitions and facts related to maximum and minimum values.
functions. function f of x has an absolute maximum at the x value of C. If f of c is
greater than or equal to f of x for all x in the domain of f. The point with x&y coordinates
of C FRC is called an absolute maximum point. And the y value f of c is called the absolute
maximum value. Now, if I draw a graph of f, the y value f of c is the highest value that
that function ever achieves. And an absolute maximum point is just a point where it achieves
that maximum value. Now, it's possible for a function to have more than one absolute
maximum point, if there happens to be a tie for the highest value. But a function has
at most one absolute maximum value. A function f of x has an absolute minimum that x equals
C, if f of c is less than or equal to f of x, for all x in the domain of f. In this case,
the point c f of c is called an absolute minimum point. And the y value f of c is called the
absolute minimum value. In the graph of f of x, f of c is now the lowest point that
the function achieves anywhere on its domain, and C SOC, are the coordinates of a point
where the function achieves that minimum value. For example, this function has an absolute
minimum value of about negative eight has an absolute minimum point with coordinates
three, negative eight. If this function stops here, and just has a domain from zero to four,
then the function has an absolute maximum value of 10 at the absolute maximum point
with coordinates for 10. If however, the function keeps going in this direction, it will not
have an absolute maximum value at all. absolute maximum and minimum values can also be called
global maximum and minimum values. In addition to absolute maximum mins, we can
talk about local maximums. So a function f of x has a local maximum at x equals C. If
f of c is greater than or equal to f of x, for all x, near C. By near C, we mean there's
some open interval around C for which this was true. For our graph of f, we have a local
maximum right here. Even though it's not the highest point anywhere around since there's
a higher point up here, this is the highest point in an open interval around see the point
C FFC is called a local maximum point. And the y value f FC is called a local maximum
value. Similarly, a function f of x has a local minimum at x equals C, if f of c is
less than or equal to f of x for all x, near C. And the point c f of c is called a local
minimum point. And the y value f of c is called a local minimum value. A function might have
many local minimum values. In this example, assuming that the domain is zero to four,
we have a local minimum point right here. Because it's the lowest point anywhere nearby.
It also happens to be an absolute minimum point. Now turning our attention to local
maximums, we have a local maximum point right here with coordinates about one two. Since
f of one is as high or higher than f of x for any x value in an open interval around
one. In this example, the absolute maximum point of 410 does not count as a local maximum
point. Simply because we can't take an open interval on both sides of for the function
doesn't exist on the right side. And so for that sort of technical reason, we end up with
an absolute maximum point That's not a local maximum point here. local maximum and minimum
values can also be called relative maximum and minimum values. Please take a look at
this graph and pause the video for a moment to mark all local maximum minimum points,
as well as all global, that is absolute maximum points. See if you can find the absolute maximum
value and the absolute minimum value for the function. I'm going to mark the local maximum
points in green, and the absolute maximum points in red. The function definitely has
a local men here. Since this is the lowest point anywhere
nearby and then open interval, and there's a local max point here. There's also a local
min point here, where the function also hits a low point and open interval. But that local
man is also an absolute man. So I'll mark it half green and half red. There's also a
local min point here at the point three, two, since this point is the as low or lower than
any point in an open interval. And the function is defined in an open interval around three,
even though it's discontinuous there. In fact, this point is tied for local minimum, with
all the points on this interval here, between two and three, there are as low or lower than
all points in an open interval around them. The point 04 doesn't count as a local max,
because the function is not defined on the other side of zero. So there's no open interval
to to consider. This point is also not an absolute maximum because the function gets
higher over here. In fact, as long as this trend continues, the function f of x has no
absolute maximum value at all, because its values just keep getting higher and higher
as x goes off to infinity. There's one more point that I want to consider. And that's
this point here, at three, three and a half. Well, it's tempting to say that f has a local
maximum here, it looks like it's the highest point in the ground. But in fact, there is
no point here at three 3.5. Right, the functions value at three is actually down here, too.
So there's no point here to be a local maximum point. And if you start looking at points
really close to that point, those aren't local maximums either, because you can always find
a point just a little bit higher as you get closer and closer, but don't quite reach this
missing point of three 3.5. So we have all the absolute and local maximum points marked.
And now to find the absolute maximum value. Well, we just said that there is none. But
the absolute minimum value is the y value of this absolute minimum point here. So I'd
say that's about 0.5. Here I've drawn the graph of a function. What do you notice about
the derivative of this function at its local maximum and minimum points, please pause the
video and think about it. Well, the local maximum minimum points are here, here and
here. And at two of those points, the derivative f prime of c equals zero. And that the third
point, f prime of c does not exist, because the function has a corner. A number c is called
a critical number for a function f if f prime of c does not exist, or f prime of c exists
and equals zero. So in other words, all of these local maximum minimum points for this
example, they're all critical points. And this is true in general, if f has a local
max or min at C, then C must be a critical number for F. We also say that the point c
f of c is a critical point for F. It's important not to read too much into this statement.
The statement says that if f has a local max or man at C then C must be a critical number.
But the converse doesn't hold. In other words, if c is a critical number, then f may or may
not have a local max or men at sea. One example to keep in mind is the function f of x equals
x cubed at a value of C of zero. Since f prime of x is 3x squared, we have that f prime of
zero equals zero. So zero is a critical number. But notice that F does not have a local maximum
man at x equals zero. In this video, we defined absolute and local,
maximum and minimums. We also defined critical numbers, which are numbers c, where f prime
of c equals zero, or f prime of c does not exist. We noted that if f has a local max
or min at C, then C is a critical number. But not necessarily advice. In this video,
we'll see how the first derivative and the second derivative can help us find local maximums
and local minimums for a function. Recall that f of x has a local maximum at x equals
C. If f of c is greater than or equal to f of x, for all x, in an open interval around
C, F of X has a local minimum at x equals C. If f of c is less than or equal to f of
x, for all x, in an open interval around C. In this example, the function f has a local
maximum at x equals six at x equals 11. And a local minimum at x equals about 10. We've
seen before that if f has a local max or local min at x equals C, then f prime of c is equal
to zero or it does not exist. Number C at which f prime of c is zero or does not exist,
are called critical numbers. But you have to be careful, because it is possible for
F to have a critical number at C. That is a place where if privacy is equal to zero,
or does not exist, but not have a local max, or min at x equals C. In fact, this happens
in the graph above, at x equals two, since f prime of two is zero, but there's no local
max or min there. Please pause the video for a moment and try to figure out what's different
about the derivative of f in the vicinity of x equals two, where there's no local max
or min, and in the vicinity of x equals 610 and 11 where there are local maxes and mins.
Near the critical point at x equals two, the derivative is positive on the left and positive
again on the right. But near the local maximums, the derivative is positive on the left and
negative on the right. And near the local minimum, the derivative is negative on the
left and positive on the right. These observations help motivate the first derivative test for
finding local maximums and minimums. The first derivative test says that if f is a continuous
function near x equals C, and if c is a critical number, then we can decide if f has a local
maximum or minimum at x equals c by looking at the first derivative near x equals C. More
specifically, if we know that f prime of x is positive for x less than c, and negative
for x greater than c, then our function looks something like this. Or maybe like this, your
x equals C, and so we have a local max at x equals C. If on the other hand, f prime
of x is negative for x less than c, and positive for x greater than c, then our function looks
something like this. Or maybe like this, your x equals C and so we have local men at x equals
see. If our first derivative is positive on both sides of C or negative on both sides
of C, then we do not have a look All extreme point at all at x equals C. Instead, our graph
might look something like this, or maybe like this. The first derivative test is great,
because it lets us locate local extreme points just by looking at the first derivative. The
second derivative test gives us an alternative for finding local maximum points by using
the second derivative. Specifically, the second derivative test tells us that if f is continuous
near x equals C, then if f prime of c is equal to zero, and f double prime of c is greater
than zero, then f has a local min at x equals C. If on
the other hand, f prime of c equals zero, and f double prime of c is less than zero,
then f has a local max at x equals C. Note that if f double prime of c is equal to zero,
or does not exist, then the second derivative test is inconclusive. We might have a local
max or a local man at x equals C, or we might not. So we'd have to use a different method
like the first derivative test to find out. In this video, we introduced the first derivative
test and the second derivative test, which allow us to determine if a function has a
local minimum or a local maximum at a certain value of x. In this video, I'll work through
two examples of finding extreme values, that is, maximum values and minimum values of functions.
In the first example, we're asked to find the absolute maximum and minimum values for
this rational function g of x on the interval from zero to four, these maximum and minimum
values could occur at critical numbers in the interior of the interval, or they could
occur at the endpoints of the interval. So we'll need to check the critical numbers,
and check the endpoints and compare our values. To find the critical numbers, those are the
numbers where g prime of x is equal to zero or does not exist. So let's take the derivative
g prime of x using the quotient rule. So we get x squared plus x plus two squared on the
denominator, and then we have low times d high, the derivative of the numerator is one
minus high times the derivative of the denominator, that's 2x plus one. Before we figure out where
that zero or doesn't exist, let's simplify it a little bit. So we can multiply out the
numerator. I'll distribute the negative sign. And I'll add together like terms in the numerator,
I'm just leaving the denominator alone on all these steps. So our simplified numerator
is going to be minus x squared plus 2x plus three. Now that I've simplified the derivative,
I can figure out where it's equal to zero and where it doesn't exist. Let me clear a
little space. Now the only way that g prime of x could not exist, is if the denominator
is zero. But on our interval, where x is between zero and 4x squared plus x plus two is always
greater than or equal to two. So the denominator is never zero on this interval. In fact, it
turns out that x squared plus x plus two is never zero, even if we look outside this interval.
And you can check that if you want to use the quadratic formula. But in any case, we
don't have to worry about the places where g prime of x does not exist. So we only have
to worry where g prime of x is equal to zero. To find where g prime of x is equal to zero,
we just have to check where the numerator is equal to zero. So I'll set negative x squared
plus 2x plus three equal to zero and multiply both sides there by negative one and a factor
I get that x equals three or x equals minus one. So these are my critical numbers. But
notice that one of these critical numbers negative one doesn't even lie within my interval,
so I don't have to worry about it. All I have to worry about is x equals 3x equals three
is one place where my function g could have an absolute maximum or minimum. So let's figure
out G's value there by plugging in three for x that evaluates to to 14th, or one set So
we've checked the critical numbers. Now let's go ahead and check the endpoints. Those are
the point the x values of zero, and four, since our interval is from zero to four. Plugging
in, we get that g of zero is negative one half, and g of four is 320 seconds. I sometimes
like to make a table of all these candidate values. The candidate x values are 03, and four and
the corresponding g of x values we found were negative a half 1/7, and 320 seconds. Now
to find the absolute maximum and minimum values, all I have to do is figure out which one of
these y values is the biggest and which is the smallest. Well, clearly negative one half
is a smallest, so that's the absolute minimum value. And we just need to compare 1/7 and
320 seconds to see which is bigger. Now, 1/7 is the same as 320 firsts, which is going
to be bigger than 320 seconds. So one half 1/7 is our absolute max value. We can confirm
this by looking at a graph of our function g. Remember, we're just interested in the
interval from zero to four. So we're just interested in this section of the graph. And
it does look like the minimum value is here at when x equals zero minimum value of negative
one half like we found, and the maximum value. Well, I'm not sure exactly where it is from
this graph, but it does look like it's somewhere around three. And that is a value of something
around 1/7. So the graph does confirm what we found as a more precise answer using calculus.
For the next example, let's find the absolute extreme values for the function f of x, which
is the absolute value of x minus x squared, on the interval from negative two to two.
As before, we can find absolute extreme values by checking first the critical numbers, and
then also the endpoints of the interval negative two and two. To find the critical numbers,
we need to take the derivative of our function. But because our function involves the absolute
value, it's a little tricky to take the derivative. Instead, let's first rewrite f using piecewise
notation. Recall that, if we're looking at the absolute value of x, when x is bigger
than or equal to zero, absolute value of x is just x. So f of x will be x minus x squared.
On the other hand, when x is less than zero, the absolute value of x is negative x. So
f of x will be negative x minus x squared. Now to take the derivative, we can take the
derivative of each piece. So when x is bigger than zero, I don't want to take the derivative
when x equals zero, because there might be funny things happening, you know, a cost per
corner, so I'm just gonna worry about when x is bigger than zero, and when x is less
than zero, for now, when x is bigger than zero, I can just use the power rule I get
one minus 2x is the derivative when x is less than zero, I get negative one minus 2x. And
now to find where I have critical numbers, I need to find where f prime of x is equal
to zero, or f prime of x does not exist. Well, f prime of x equals zero, where one minus
2x equals zero for x bigger than zero. And where one, negative one minus 2x is equal
to zero for x less than zero. So that corresponds to x equal one half for x bigger than zero,
and x equals negative one half for x less than zero. So those are my first two critical
numbers. And that is they do lie within my interval that I'm interested in. But I also
have to worry about where f prime of x does not exist. And the candidate x value for that
is where x equals 01 way to convince ourselves the derivative does not exist when x equals
zero is to look at the fact that the derivative is very close to one for x values, very close
to zero from the right side and very close to negative one for x values from the left
side. So the graph of the function is going to have to be sloping down with a slope near
negative one for x less than zero and up with a slope near one for x greater than zero,
and so it'll end up having a cost per corner there. Also notice that even if I weren't 100% sure
that the derivative didn't exist at x equals zero, it's not going to hurt to consider this
x equals zero as a possible additional candidate for the absolute max or min value. So I've
got my three critical numbers, and my end points are just going to be x equals negative
two and x equals two. So let me make a chart of values my x values to consider are negative
two, negative one half 01, half and positive two, and my corresponding f of x values are
going to be, let's say absolute value of negative two minus negative two squared works out to
two minus four, which is negative two, I plug in negative one half, I get one half minus
1/4, which is 1/4. plug in zero, I get zero. and plugging in one half, I get 1/4. And plugging
in two, I get negative two again. So now my biggest value is going to be 1/4. So that's
my absolute max value, and my smallest value is going to be negative two. So that's my
absolute min value, I can confirm what I found looking at the graph. So here I've graphed
my function, y equals absolute value of x minus x squared on the interval from negative
two to two. And I can see indeed, that my absolute min is going to be a value of negative
two, it occurs at two absolute minimum points, and my absolute maximum is going to be a value
of about 1/4. And that occurs at two absolute maximum points. And that concludes this video
on finding extreme values. the mean value theorem relates the average rate of change
of a function on an interval to its instantaneous rate of change, or derivative. Let's assume
that f is a function defined on a closed interval a, b, and maybe defined in some other places
to let's assume that f is continuous on the whole closed interval. And that is differentiable
on the interior of the interval, then the mean value theorem says that there must be
some number c in the interval a, b, such that the average rate of change of f on a B is
equal to the derivative of f at C. In symbols, we can write the average rate of change as
f of b minus F of A over B minus A. And that has to equal f prime at C for some number
C. On the graph, the average rate of change of f is the slope of the secant line. And
so the mean value theorem says that there's some number c, somewhere in between a and
b, so that the slope of the secant line is exactly the same as the slope of the tangent
line at that x value of C. The number c is not necessarily unique. So I encourage you
to pause the video and see if you can draw a graph of a function where there's more than
one c value that works. So you might have drawn something maybe like this. Now, if we
draw our secant line, there's two values of c, where the slope of the tangent line is
equal to the slope of the secant line. In this example, we're asked to verify the mean
value theorem for a particular function on a particular interval. Verify means that we
need to check the hypotheses of the theorem hold. And also the the conclusion holds. The
hypotheses are that f is continuous on the closed interval, one three, and that is differentiable
on that interior of that interval. Both of these facts are true, because f is a polynomial.
Now we need to verify that the conclusion of the mean value theorem holds. In other
words, we need to find a number c in the interval one, three, such that the derivative of f
at C is equal to the average rate of change of f on the interval from one to three. Now f prime of x is 6x squared minus eight.
So f prime at any number c is just six c squared minus eight. We can also compute f of three
just by plugging in and get 31 and f of one is negative five. Plugging in these values
into our equation, we get that six c squared minus eight has to equal 31 minus negative
five over To, in other words, six c squared minus eight had better equal 18, which means
that six c squared needs to equal 24. So C squared has to equal four, which means that
C has to equal plus or minus two. Since negative two is not in the interval from one to three,
we're left with a c value of positive two. So C equals two is the number we're looking
for. And at C equals to f prime is equal to 18, which is the average rate of change of
f on the interval. we've verified the mean value theorem. In this example, we're told
that f of one is seven, and that the derivative of f is bounded between negative three and
negative two. On the interval one six, we're asked to find the biggest and smallest values
that f of six could possibly be. Well, the mean value theorem gives us one way of relating
the derivative of the function to its values on the endpoints of the interval. More specifically,
the mean value theorem tells us that the average rate of change F of six minus f of one over
six minus one is equal to the derivative f prime of c, for some C, in the interval, one,
six. Since the derivative is bounded between negative three and negative two, we know that
the average rate of change is bounded between negative three and negative two. We know that
f of one is seven. And now we can solve this inequality for f of six. Multiply the inequality
by five and add seven. And now we can see that negative eight is the smallest possible
value for F six and negative three is the largest possible roles, there is an important
special case of the mean value theorem. If f is a function defined on the closed interval
a b, and f of x is continuous on that whole closed interval, differentiable on the interior
of the interval. And if f of a is equal to f of b, then there's a number c in the interval a,
b, such that f prime of c is zero. If we look at a graph of such a function that has equal
values at a, and at B, we can see where its derivative has to be zero at a maximum, or
a minimum in between A and B. To see why the rolls there is a special case of the mean
value theorem. Think about what the mean value theorem would say about this function, it
would say there is a C, such that f prime of c is equal to the average rate of change
of the function. But since f of b and F of A are the same, by our assumption, this average
rate of change is just zero. And so the mean value theorem, its conclusion is that there's
a C, such that f prime of c equals zero, which is exactly the conclusion of rules theorem.
In this video, we saw that for a function that's continuous on a closed interval, and
differentiable on the interior of that interval, the average rate of change of the function
is equal to the instantaneous rate of change of the function, f prime of c for some C in
the interval. This video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals. the
mean value theorem for integrals says that for continuous function f of x, defined on
interval from a to b, there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal
to the average value of f. The first proof that I'm going to give uses the intermediate
value theorem. Recall that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous
function f defined on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two, if we have some number l in
between, f of x one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between
x one and x two. Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back
to the mean value theorem for integrals. Now, it's possible that our function f of x might
be constant on the interval from a to b. But if that's true, then our mean value theorem
for integrals holds easily, because f AV is just equal to that constant, which is equal
to f of c for any c between A and B. So let's assume that f is not constant, will it continue
continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value,
which I'll call little m, and big M. Now, we know that F's average value on the interval
has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value. If you don't believe this,
consider the fact that all of F's values on the interval have to lie between big M and
little m. And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than
or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a. Notice
that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant. Now if I divide
all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average
value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted. Now, I just need to apply the
intermediate value theorem with F's average as my number L and little m and big M as my
values of f of x one and f of x two. The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved
by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two. And therefore, for some C in my interval
a b. And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals. Now I'm going to give a second
proof for the mean value theorem for integrals. And this time, it's going to be as a corollary
to the regular mean value theorem for functions. Recall that the mean value theorem for functions,
says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that
interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at
C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the
mean value theorem for integrals. I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral
from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value
theorem for integrals. Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is
zero, while g of B is the integral from a to b of our function. Now, by the fundamental
theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval
a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x. And by the mean value theorem for functions,
we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some numbers,
C and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below,
we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus
a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach. This shows that the mean
value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our
function is an integral. And this completes the second proof of the main value theorem
for integrals. So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different
ways. And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way in this video, We'll
solve inequalities involving polynomials like this one, and inequalities involving rational
expressions like this one. Let's start with a simple example, maybe a deceptively simple
example, if you see the inequality, x squared is less than four, you might be very tempted
to take the square root of both sides and get something like x is less than two as your
answer. But in fact, that doesn't work. To see why it's not correct, consider the x value
of negative 10. Negative 10 satisfies the inequality, x is less than two, since negative
10 is less than two. But it doesn't satisfy the inequality x squared is less than four,
since negative 10 squared is 100, which is not less than four. So these two inequalities
are not the same. And it doesn't work to solve a quadratic inequality just to take the square
root of both sides, you might be thinking part of why this reasoning is wrong, as we've
ignored the negative two option, right? If we had the equation, x squared equals four,
then x equals two would just be one option, x equals negative two would be another solution.
So somehow, our solution to this inequality should take this into account. In fact, a
good way to solve an inequality involving x squares or higher power terms, is to solve
the associated equation first. But before we even do that, I like to pull everything
over to one side, so that my inequality has zero on the other side. So for our equation,
I'll subtract four from both sides to get x squared minus four is less than zero. Now,
I'm going to actually solve the associated equation, x squared minus four is equal to
zero, I can do this by factoring 2x minus two times x plus two is equal to zero. And
I'll set my factors equal to zero, and I get x equals two and x equals minus two. Now,
I'm going to plot the solutions to my equation on the number line. So I write down negative
two and two, those are the places where my expression x squared minus four is equal to
zero. Since I want to find where x squared minus
four is less than zero, I want to know whether this expression x squared minus four is positive
or negative, a good way to find that out is to plug in test values. So first, I plug in
a test value in this area, the number line, something less than negative two, say x equals
negative three. If I plug in negative three into x squared minus four, I get negative
three squared minus four, which is nine minus four, which is five, that's a positive number.
So at negative three, the expression, x squared minus four is positive. And in fact, everywhere
on this region of the number line, my expression is going to be positive, because it can jump
from positive to negative, without going through a place where it's zero, I can figure out
whether x squared minus four is positive or negative on this region, and on this region
of the number line by plugging in test value similar way, evaluate the plug in between
negative two and two, a nice value is x equals 00 squared minus four, that's negative four
and negative number. So I know that my expression x squared minus four is negative on this whole
interval. Finally, I can plug in something like x equals 10, something bigger than two,
and I get 10 squared minus four. Without even computing that I can tell that that's going
to be a positive number. And that's all that's important. Again, since I want x squared minus
four to be less than zero, I'm looking for the places on this number line where I'm getting
negatives. So I will share that in on my number line. It's in here, not including the endpoints,
because the endpoints are where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero and
I want it strictly less than zero, I can write my answer. As an inequality, negative two
is less than x is less than two, or an interval notation as soft bracket negative two, two
soft bracket. Our next example, we can solve similarly, first, we'll move everything to
one side so that our inequality is x cubed minus 5x squared minus 6x is greater than
or equal to zero. Next, we'll solve the associated equation by factoring. So first, I'll write
down the equation. Now I'll factor out an x. And now I'll factor the quadratic. So the
solutions to my equation are x equals 0x equals six and x e equals negative one, I'll write
the solutions to the equation on the number line. So that's negative one, zero, and six.
That's where my expression x times x minus six times x plus one is equal to zero. But
I want to find where it's greater than or equal to zero. So again, I can use test values,
I can plug in, for example, x equals negative two, either to this version of expression,
or to this factored version. Since I only care whether my answer is positive or negative,
it's sometimes easier to use the factored version. For example, when x is negative two,
this factor is negative. But this factor, x minus six is also negative when I plug in
negative two for x. Finally, x plus one, when I plug in negative two for x, that's negative
one, that's also negative. And a negative times a negative times a negative gives me
a negative number. If I plug in something between negative one and zero, say x equals
negative one half, then I'm going to get a negative for this factor, a negative for this
factor, but a positive for this third factor. Negative times negative times positive gives
me a positive for a test value between zero and six, let's try x equals one. Now I'll
get a positive for this factor a negative for this factor, and a positive for this factor.
positive times a negative times a positive gives me a negative. Finally, for a test value
bigger than six, we could use a x equals 100, that's going to give me positive positive
positive. So my product will be positive. Since I want values where my expression is
greater than or equal to zero, I want the places where n equals zero. And the places
where it's positive. So my final answer will be close bracket negative one to zero, close
bracket union, close bracket six to infinity. As our final example, let's consider the rational
inequality, x squared plus 6x plus nine divided by x minus one is less than or equal to zero.
Although it might be tempting to clear the denominator and multiply both sides by x minus
one, it's dangerous to do that, because x minus one could be a positive number. But
it could also be a negative number. And when you multiply both sides by a negative number,
you have to reverse the inequality. Although it's possible to solve the inequality this
way, by thinking of cases where x minus one is less than zero or bigger than zero, I think
it's much easier just to solve the same way as we did before. So we'll start by rewriting
so that we move all terms to the left and have zero on the right, well, that's already
true. So the next step would be to solve the associated equation. That is x squared plus
6x plus nine over x minus one is equal to zero. That would be where the numerators 0x
squared plus 6x plus nine is equal to zero, so we're x plus three squared is zero, or
x equals negative three, there's one extra step we have to do for rational expressions.
And that's we need to find where the expression does not exist. That is, let's find where
the denominator is zero. And that said, x equals one. I'll put all those numbers on
the number line, the places where my rational expression is equal to zero, and the place
where my rational expression doesn't exist, then I can start in with test values. For
example, x equals minus four, zero and two work. If I plug those values into this expression
here, I get a negative answer, a negative answer and a positive answer. The reason I
need to conclude the values on my number line where my denominator is zero is because I
can my expression can switch from negative to positive by passing through a place where
my rational expression doesn't exist, as well as passing by passing flew to a place where
my rational expression is equal to zero. Now I'm looking for where my original expression
was less than or equal to zero. So that means I want the places on the number line where
my expression is equal to zero, and also the places where it's negative. So My final answer
is x is less than one, or an interval notation, negative infinity to one. In this video, we
solved polynomial and rational inequalities by making a number line. And using test values
to make a sign chart. The first and second derivative of a function can tell us a lot
about the shape of the graph of the function. In this video, we'll see what f prime and
f double prime can tell us about where the function is increasing and decreasing, is
concave up and concave down and has inflection points. We say that a function is increasing.
If f of x one is less than f of x two, whenever x one is less than x two. In other words,
the graph of the function goes up. As x increases from left to right, we say the function f
is decreasing. If f of x one is greater than f of f two, whenever x one is less than x
two. In other words, the height of the function goes down as we move from left to right. In
this graph, it's a little hard to say what's happening when x is near two, is it completely
horizontal, or is the graph slightly increasing? If we assume it's slightly increasing, then,
in this example, f of x is increasing as x ranges from zero to six, and again as x ranges
from 10 to 11. The graph is decreasing for x values between six and 10. And for x values
between 11 and 12, the first derivative of f can tell us where the function is increasing
and decreasing. In particular, if f prime of x is greater than zero for all x on an
interval, then f is increasing on this interval. This makes sense, because f prime being greater
than zero means the tangent line has positive slope. Similarly, if f prime of x is less
than zero for all excellent interval, then f is decreasing on this interval. That's because
a negative derivative means the tangent line has a negative slope. A precise proof of these facts can be found
in the textbook, or in another video, we say that a function is concave up on an interval
from a to b. If informally, it looks like a bowl that could hold water on that interval.
More formally, the function is concave up on that interval. If all the tangent lines
for the function on that interval, lie below the graph of the function. The function is
concave down on the interval from a to b. If informally, it looks like an upside down
ball that would spill water on that interval. Or more formally, the function is concave
down. If all the tangent lines lie above the graph of the function on an interval. In this
example, f is concave up around here. And again around here. On the left piece, it looks
like part of a ball that could hold water. So we can say that f is concave up on the
intervals from two to four, and the interval from eight to 11. f is concave down on this
piece, and this piece and this piece, so we can say that f is concave down on the interval
from zero to two, from four to eight, and from 11 to 12. The concavity of a function
is related to its second derivative. Here, where the function is concave up, its derivative
is going from essentially zero to larger positive values. So the first road was increasing,
which means the second derivative is positive. On this section of the graph, which is also
concave up, the driven is going from negative values to zero. That's an increase in the
first derivative. So that means the second derivative here must be positive. And in this
piece, where the first term is going from zero to positive values, the first derivative
is also increasing, so the second derivative is also positive. On the parts of the function
that are concave down, we can see that in this example, the second derivative is negative.
Here, the first derivative is going from positive towards zero, that's a decrease in the first
derivative or a negative second derivative. Here the first derivative is going from positive
to zero to negative, that's also a decreasing first derivative or a negative second derivative.
And the same thing happens on this section here. In general, we can use the second derivative
to predict the concavity of a function. The concavity test says that if the second derivative
is positive for all x on an interval, then the function f is concave up on that interval.
Similarly, if the second derivative is negative for all x on the interval, then the function
f is concave down on that interval. One way to remember the concavity test is that a positive
second derivative gives us a happy face. So the smile is supposed to be a concave up function.
And a negative second derivative gives us a sad face where the smile or the frown, I
guess, is a concave down function. Next, let's talk about inflection points. A function has
an inflection point at x equals C, if it's continuous at C, and it changes concavity
at C. In other words, f has an inflection point at x equals C. If f changes from concave
up to concave down at x equals C, or it changes from concave down to concave up. In this graph,
if we draw the concavity regions again, we see that F has an inflection point at x equals
two, where the function changes from concave down to concave up at x equals four, where
the function changes from concave up to concave down at x equals eight, and again, at x equals
11. Since concavity, has to do with the second derivative being positive or negative, inflection
points happen where the second derivative changes sign from positive to negative, or
from negative to positive. And that's exactly what the inflection point test says. If f
double prime of x changes sign at x equals C, then f has an inflection point
at x equals C. Now in order to change from positive to negative or negative positive,
f double prime has to go through zero, or go through a point where it doesn't exist.
But you have to be careful, just because f double prime is zero, it doesn't exist, does
not guarantee that you necessarily have an inflection point, because it could be zero
and still be positive on both sides or negative on both sides. For example, if f of x is x
to the fourth, then f prime of x is for x cubed, and f double prime of x is 12x squared.
So f double prime at zero is certainly zero. But there is no inflection point at x equals
zero. In fact, the graph of f of x equals x to the fourth looks kinda like a flattened
quadratic, and so there's no change in calm cavity, f is concave up on both sides of x
equals zero. In this video, without the first derivative can tell us where the function
is increasing and decreasing, while the second derivative can tell us where the function
is concave up and concave down. And the second derivative, changing sign from positive to
negative or negative or positive can tell us where we have inflection points. Since
lines are much easier to work with, and more complicated functions, it can be extremely
useful to approximate a function near a particular value with its tangent line. That's the central
idea of this video. Let's start with an example. Suppose that F of T is the temperature in
degrees Fahrenheit at time t measured in hours, where t equals zero represents midnight. Suppose
that f of six is 60 degrees, and the derivative f prime of six is three degrees per hour.
What's your best estimate for the temperature at 7am and at 8am? Please pause the video
for a moment to make your estimate. The temperature at 6am is 60 degrees. So the temperature at
7am, which we're calling F of seven is approximately 60 degrees. But we can do better than this.
At 6am, the temperature is rising, in fact, it's rising at a rate of three degrees per
hour. If this rate of change continues, then by 7am, the temperature will have risen three
degrees and reached 63 degrees. And by 8am, the temperature will have had two hours to
rise from 60 degrees by a rate at a rate of three degrees per hour. So f of eight should
be about 60 degrees plus the three degrees per hour times two hours or 66 degrees. These
estimates use all the information, we're given both the value of the temperature at six,
and its rate of change. Let's see what these estimates mean graphically, in terms of the
tangent line. I'll draw a rough graph of temperature over time. And I'll also draw in the tangent
line at time six. At time six, the height of the function and the tangent line is equal
to 60 degrees. The tangent line has slope three degrees per hour. So that's a rise of
a run of three, which means that seven o'clock, which is one hour, after six o'clock, the
tangent line has risen by three degrees. And at eight o'clock, the tangent line has risen
by another three degrees. So at seven o'clock, our tangent line has had 63 degrees, and at
eight o'clock, our tangent line has height 66 degrees. When making these estimates, here,
we were actually using the tangent line to approximate our function. Our actual temperature
function may be rising more steeply than the tangent line, or it possibly could be rising
less steeply, like in this picture. But either way, the tangent line is a good approximation
for our function. When time is near six o'clock. The idea of approximating a function with
its tangent line is a very important idea that works for any differentiable function.
Let f of x be any differentiable function and let A be an arbitrary x value. Let's suppose
we know the value of f at a, we'll call it F of A. And let's say we want to find the
value of f, add an x value near a, let's call it a plus delta x where delta x means a small
number. If we can't compute f of a plus delta x directly, we can try to approximate it using
the tangent line. We know that the tangent line has a slope
given by f prime of a. And so when we go over by a run of delta x, the tangent line goes
up by a rise of f prime of A times delta x. So the height of the tangent line is going
to be f of a plus f prime of A times delta x. The linear approximation principle says
that we can approximate our function with our tangent line. In other words, f of a plus
delta x is approximately equal to f of a plus f prime of a delta x. Remember that delta
x is supposed to be a small number, because if you get too far away from a, your tangent
lines no longer going to be a good approximation of your function. But how small is small enough
is sort of a judgment call. Sometimes the approximation principle is written with different
symbols, if we let x equal a plus delta x, so x is a number close to a, then delta x
is x minus a. And we can rewrite the approximation principle, as f of x is approximately f of
a plus f prime of A times x minus a. The quantity on the right side here is sometimes referred
to as l of x, and called the linearization of f at A. That is the linearization of f
of a is l of x, which is equal to f of a plus f prime of A times x minus a. So the approximation
principle can also be written as f of x is approximately equal to l of x. Let's look
a little more closely at this linearization equation and what it has to do with the tangent
line. Suppose we were going to try to write down the equation of the tangent line at x
equals a, well, the equation for any line can be given in point slope form as y minus
y naught equals the slope times x minus x naught. Since we're looking for the tangent
line that goes through the point A f of a, we can set x naught equal to a and y naught
equal to f of a. Also, the slope of the tangent line is just f prime of a. So we can rewrite
this as y minus F of A equals f prime of A times x minus a solving for y, we get y equals
f of a plus f prime of A times x minus a. So this equation for the tangent line is really
just the equation that we have for the linearization. But linearization is really just a fancy word
for the tangent line. There's a lot of notation and definitions on this page. But there's
only one important principle that you need to remember. And that's the idea that you
can approximate a function with its tangent line. If you can keep that idea and this picture
in mind, then it's easy to come up with this approximation principle. And its alternative
forms. Let's use the approximation principle in an example, the approximation principle
tells us that f of a plus delta x is approximately equal to f of a plus f prime of A times delta
x, we need to figure out what f should be what a should be, and what delta x should
be. Since we're trying to figure out the square root of 59, it makes sense to make our function
the square root function. For a, we'd like to pick something that is easy to compute
f of a, well, what's the number close to 59, that is easy to compute the square root of
64 springs to mind. So let's set a equal to 64. Since we're trying to compute the square
root of 59, we want a plus delta x to be 59. In other words, 64 plus delta x is 59. And
so delta x should be negative five, it's fine to have a negative number for delta x. Now
plugging into our approximation formula, we have f of 59 is approximately equal to f of
64, plus f prime of 64 times negative five. Since f of x is the square root of x, or in
other words, x to the one half power, f prime of x is going to be one half x to the minus
one half power, or one over two times the square root of x. So f prime of 64 is one
over two times the square root of 64, which is 1/16. I can rewrite my red equation to
say the square root of 59 is approximately the square root of 64 plus 1/16 times negative
five, which is eight minus five sixteenths, or 7.6875. using a calculator, I can get a
more exact value of the square to 59. my calculator says 7.68114575, up to eight decimal places.
Let me draw the picture that goes along with this approximation. We have the square root
function, and at x equals 64, we're looking at the tangent line. Our delta x here is a
negative five, and gets us down to 59. So we're using the value of our tangent line
right here to approximate our actual square root function right here. As you can see from
the picture, it looks like the tangent line value should be slightly bigger than the actual
value. And in fact, that's what we get. Then next example is very similar. We call it the
linearization of a function is just the equation for its tangent line. Namely, the linearization
at a is f of a plus f prime of A times x minus a. And the approximation principle says that
f of x, the function is approximately equal to its linearization. Its tangent line, at
least when x is near a. This is basically the same formula that we use in the last problem,
we're just calling our value x this time instead of a plus delta x. Since we're trying to estimate
sine of A value, it makes sense to let our function be sine of x. For a, we want to pick
a number that's close to 33 degrees, for which it's easy to calculate sine of that number.
Well, sine of 30 degrees is easy to calculate. So let's make a equal to 30 degrees, but let's
put it in radians and call it pi over six. in calculus, we pretty much always want to
use radians for sine and cosine especially when taking derivatives. Since the derivative
formula, D sine x dx equals cosine of x only works when x is in radians, our x needs to
be 33 degrees, since that's the value, we want to estimate the sine of, we need to multiply
by pi over 180 degrees to convert it to radians. So that becomes 11 pi over 60 radians. Let's
plug in for F and a first to get the linearization. And then we'll plug in for x next. So the
linearization of our function is going to be sine of pi over six, plus the derivative
of sine at pi over six times x minus pi over six. That is l of x is one half, since sine
of pi over six is one half, plus cosine of pi over six times x minus pi over six, cosine
of pi over six is the square root of three over two. So this is our equation for the
tangent line, or the linearization of sine of x at pi over six. Now we know that sine
of x is approximately equal to as linearisation, as long as x is near pi over six. So in particular,
sine of our 33 degrees in radians, which is 11 pi over 60 is approximately equal to one
half plus a square root of three over two times 11 pi over 60 minus pi over six. That simplifies to one half plus the square
root of three over two times pi over 60. And now I'm going to cheat a little bit and use
my calculator to get a decimal value for this of about 0.5453. Now if I use my calculator
to find sine of 11 pi over 60, directly, remember, that's the same thing as sine of 33 degrees.
my calculator tells me it is 0.5446, approximately. So you can see our approximation using the
linearization is very close to the calculators, more accurate value. Notice that in this example,
the approximate value based on the linearization is slightly higher than the actual value.
And you can see why from a graph of sine. The tangent line at pi over six lies slightly
above the graph of sine x. Therefore, the approximate value based on the linearization
will be slightly bigger than the actual value of sine of 33 degrees. In this video, we use
several formulas to express one key idea. The main formulas were the approximation principle,
the linear approximation, and the linearization. The key idea is that a differentiable function
can be approximated near a value x equals A by the tangent line at x equals a. The differential
is a new vocabulary word wrapped around the familiar concept of approximating a function
with its tangent line. This figure should look familiar from the previous video on linear
approximation is the same picture. Suppose we have a differentiable function, f of x,
and we know the value of f at some x value a. That is, we know the value of f evey, but
we don't know the value of f at some nearby x value a plus delta x. That is we don't know
f of a plus delta x. So we draw the tangent line to f of x at x equals a. And we use the
tangent line at a plus delta x as an approximation for the function at a plus delta x. Since
the tangent line has slope of f prime of a, the rise of a run is f prime of a. So if this
run here is delta x, this rise has to be f prime of A times delta x. So the height of
the tangent line here at a plus delta x is going to be f of a plus f prime of A times
delta x. That's just the height here plus the extra height here. And since we're using
that height to approximate In our function, we say that f of a plus delta x is approximately
equal to f of a plus f prime of A times delta x equivalently. If I subtract F of A from
both sides, I get f of a plus delta x minus f of a is approximately equal to f prime of
A times delta x. This equation is just the approximation principle that we've seen before.
And this is a very slight alteration of it. So there's nothing new yet. But now I'm going
to wrap some new notation around this familiar concept. The differential dx is another way
of writing delta x, you can think of it as a small change in the value of x. The differential
df is defined as f prime of x dx, or equivalently f prime of x delta x. Sometimes this is written
as d y instead, but d y just means the same thing here as df. Sometimes it's handy to
specify the differential add a particular value of x, like a value of x equals a, and
this is written df equals f prime of a dx, or f prime of a delta x. Notice that the value
of a is not apparent when you just write down d f, or d y. Finally, the change in f, which is written
delta f, is defined as f of x plus delta x minus f of x for some value of x, for example,
f of a plus delta x minus f of a, this can also be written as the change in y. Using
these new definitions, we can now rewrite our approximation principle to say, delta
f is approximately equal to d f, the change in the function is approximately equal to
the differential course this could also be written as the change in Y is approximately
equal to d y. In the picture, we can now write d x for the run, and D, F, for the rise of
the tangent line. Pause the video and take a moment to find delta f in this picture,
though delta f is f of a plus delta x minus f of a, so that's this height here. I'll write
that as delta f, or delta y. So the approximation principle, written in differential notation,
is just saying that the rise of the function, delta f is approximated by the rise in the
tangent line df. Let's use the differential and an example. For the function f of x equal
to x times ln x. Let's first find the differential df. We know that df is equal to f prime of
x dx. And f prime of x by the product rule is equal to x times the derivative of ln x,
which is one over x plus the derivative of x, which is one times ln x. So in other words,
one plus ln x. Therefore, df is equal to one plus ln x times dx. When x equals two, and
delta x equals negative point three, well delta x is the same thing as dx, we can just
plug in those values and get df is one plus ln of two times negative 0.3. as a decimal,
that's approximately negative 0.5079. Now delta f is defined as f of x plus delta x
minus f of x. So for our function, that's x plus delta x times ln of x plus delta x
minus x ln x. Plugging in the given values for x and delta x, we get delta f is two minus
0.3 times ln of two minus 0.3 minus two ln two, which according to my calculator is negative
zero. Point 4842. And we see that the change in the function between two and two minus
point three is closely approximated by the change in the tangent line. As expected. The
differential is often used to estimate error, as in this example, suppose that the radius
of a sphere is measured as eight centimeters with a possible error of point five centimeters.
So the sphere that we measure looks something like this, but the actual sphere might be
slightly bigger, or slightly smaller, we want to use the differential to estimate the resulting
error in computing the volume of the sphere. Well, the volume of a sphere is given by four
thirds pi r cubed, where r is the radius. If our radius changes by point five centimeters,
our volume will change by substantially more. And that change in volume is the error the
resulting error in measuring volume. But instead of computing delta V directly, we're asked
to approximate it using the differential. So we're going to use the fact that delta
V is approximately equal to dv, which is easier to compute. By definition, dv is equal to the derivative
of our function, I'll just call that v prime as a function of r times Dr. Now, v prime
of r is equal to four pi r squared, just by taking the derivative. And here, we're interested
in an R value of eight, and a value of Dr. Same as delta r of 0.5 centimeters. So dv
is going to be four pi r squared Dr. And when I plug in R and D R, I get four pi times eight
squared times 0.5, which is 128 pi, or as a decimal 402.1 centimeters. That's our error
estimate, which seems quite a bit bigger than our original error of point five in measuring
the radius. Now, the relative error of a function is its error over the original value of the
function. So in our case, it's the change in volume over the actual volume. Since we're
using the differential instead, we'll compute the relative error as dv over V. Now, the
volume when r is eight centimeters, is four thirds times pi times eight cubed. And dv,
we already saw was four pi times eight squared times 0.5. So dv divided by V is given by
this ratio, which simplifies to 0.1875. So an 18.75% relative there. To me, the relative
error gives a better sense for the error than the absolute error estimate above. This video
introduced the idea of the differential, we said that we could think of dx as just being
another way of writing delta x, but df represents the rise in the tangent line, and is equal
to f prime of x times dx. Whereas delta f is the rise in the actual function F. And
that's f of x plus delta x minus f of x. On the picture, dx is the run, df is the rise
in the tangent line. And delta f is the rise in the actual function. In the language of
differentials, we can restate the approximation principle to say that the change in f can
be approximated by the differential. In the past, we've encountered limits, like the limit
as x goes to two of x minus two over x squared minus four. We can't evaluate this limit just
by plugging in two for x, because x minus two goes to zero, and x squared minus four
goes to zero as x goes to two. This is known as a zero over zero indeterminate form. It's
called indeterminate because we can't tell what the limit is going to be just by the
fact that the numerator goes to zero and the denominator goes to zero. It depends on how
fast the numerator and the denominator are going to zero compared to each other. And
the final limit of the quotient could be any number at all, or it could be infinity or
it could not even exist. In the past, we've been able to evaluate some limits in zero
over zero indeterminate form by using algebraic tricks to rewrite the quotients. In this video,
we'll introduce lopi talls rule, which is a very powerful technique for evaluating limits
and indeterminate forms. A limited of the form the limit as x goes to a of f of x over
g of x is called a zero over zero indeterminate form, if the limit as x goes to a of f of
x is equal to zero, and the limit as x goes to a of g of x is equal to zero. A limit and
this form is called an infinity over infinity and determinant form. If the limit as x goes
to a of f of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity. And the limit as x goes to a of
g of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity. We saw an example of a zero over zero indeterminate
form in the introductory slide. One example of a infinity over infinity and
determinant form is the limit as x goes to infinity of 3x squared minus 2x plus seven
divided by negative 2x squared plus 16. Notice that as x goes to infinity, the numerator
goes to infinity while the denominator goes to negative infinity. In these definitions
of indeterminate form, it's possible for a to be negative infinity or infinity, like
it is in this example, but it doesn't have to be loopy. talls rule can be applied when
f and g are differentiable functions. And the derivative of g is nonzero in some open
interval around a except possibly in a under these conditions, if the limit as x goes to
a of f of x over g of x is zero over zero or infinity over infinity indeterminant form
than the limit as x goes to a of f of x over g of x is the same thing as the limit as x
goes to a of f prime of x over g prime of x, provided that the second limit exists,
or as plus or minus infinity. Let's look at loopy tiles rule in action. In this example,
as x goes to infinity, the numerator x goes to infinity and the denominator three to the
x also goes to infinity. So we have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. So let's
try applying lopi tiles rule, our original limit should equal the limit as x goes to
infinity of the derivative of the numerator, which is one divided by the derivative of
the denominator, which is ln of three times three to the x, provided that the second limit
exists or as infinity or negative infinity. In the second limit, the numerators just fixed
at one. And the nominator goes to infinity as x goes to infinity. Therefore, the second
limit is just zero. And so the original limit evaluates to zero as well. In this example,
we have a zero over zero indeterminate form, because as x goes to zero, sine of x and x,
both go to zero in the numerator, and sine of x cubed goes to zero in the denominator.
So using low Patel's rule, I'll try to evaluate instead, the limit I get by taking the derivative
of the numerator and the derivative of the denominator, the derivative of sine x minus
x is cosine of x minus one, and the derivative of sine x cubed is three times sine x squared
times cosine x using the chain rule. Now let me try to evaluate the limit again, as x goes
to zero, cosine of x goes to one. So the numerator here goes to zero. As x goes to zero, sine
of x goes to zero and cosine of x goes to one, so the denominator also goes to zero.
So I still have a zero over zero indeterminate form. And I might as well try applying loopy
toss rule again. But before I do, I want to point out that cosine of x is going to one.
So the cosine of x here really isn't affecting my limit. And in fact, I could rewrite my
limit of a product as a product of limits where the second limit is just one and can
be ignored from here on out. Now apply lopatok rule on this first limit, which is a little
bit easier to take the derivatives and so the derivative of the top is minus sine x.
And the derivative of the bottom is six times sine x times cosine x. Now let's try to evaluate
again, as x goes to zero, our numerator is going to zero, and our denominator is also
going to zero. But hang on, we don't have to apply lobby towels rule again, because
we can actually just simplify our expression, the sine x on the top cancels with the sine
x on the bottom. And we can just rewrite our limit as the limit of negative one over six
cosine of x, which evaluates easily to negative one, six. In this example, I want to emphasize that
it's a good idea to simplify after each application of lopi talls rule. If you don't simplify,
like we did here, then you might be tempted to apply loopy towels rule and additional
time when you don't need to, which might make the problem more complicated. Instead of simpler
to solve this video, we were able to evaluate zero over zero and infinity over infinity
indeterminate forms by replacing the limit of f of x over g of x with the limit of f
prime of x over g prime of x, provided that second limit exists. This trick is known as
lopi tels rule. We've seen that lopatok rule can be used to evaluate limits of the form
zero over zero, or infinity over infinity. In this video, we'll continue to use lopi
towels rule to evaluate additional indeterminate forms, like zero times infinity, infinity
to the 00 to the zero, and one to the infinity. In this example, we want to evaluate the limit
of a product. Notice that as x goes to zero from the positive side, sine x goes to zero,
and ln x goes to negative infinity. Remember the graph of y equals ln x. So this is actually
a zero times infinity indeterminate form. Even though the second factor is going to
negative infinity, we still call it a zero times infinity and indeterminate form, you
can think of the Infinity here as standing for either positive or negative infinity.
It it's indeterminant. Because as x goes to zero, the sine x factor is pulling the product
towards zero, while the ln x factor is pulling the product towards large negative numbers.
And it's hard to predict what the limit of the product will actually be. But the great
thing is, I can actually rewrite this product to look like an infinity over infinity and
determinant form, or a zero over zero and determinant form. Instead of sine x times
ln x, I can rewrite the limit as ln x divided by one over sine x. Now as x goes to zero,
my numerator is going to negative infinity. And since sine x is going to zero through
positive numbers, my denominator one over sine x is going to positive infinity. So I
have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. Now, I could instead choose to leave
the sine x in the numerator, and instead, put a one over ln x in the denominator. If
I do this, then as x goes to zero through positive numbers, sine x goes to zero. And
since ln x goes to negative infinity, one over ln x goes to zero. And so I have a zero
over zero indeterminate form. Sometimes it can be difficult to decide which of these
two ways to rewrite a product as a quotient. One rule of thumb is to take the version that
makes it easier to take the derivative of the numerator and denominator. Another trick
is just to try one of the ways and if you get stuck, go back and try the other. I'm
going to use the first method of rewriting it because I recognize that one over sine
x can be written as cosecant of x. And I know how to take the derivative of cosecant x.
Using low Beatles rule on this infinity over infinity and determinant form, I can rewrite
my limit as the limit of what I get when I take the derivative of the numerator, that's
whenever x divided by the derivative of the denominator, that's negative cosecant x cotangent
x. As always, I want to simplify my expression before going any further. I can rewrite my
trig functions in the denominator in terms of sine and cosine. cosecant x is one over
sine x cotangent x is cosine of x over sine of x. Now flipping and multiplying, I get
the limit as x goes to zero plus of one over x times sine squared of x over negative cosine
of x. In other words, the limit of negative sine squared x over x cosine x, we know that cosine of x goes to one as x
goes to zero. So I can rewrite this as the limit of negative sine squared x over x times
the limit of something that goes to one. So I once again have a zero over zero indeterminate
form. And I can apply lopatok rule yet again, taking the derivative of the top, I get negative
two, sine x, cosine of x. And the job of the bottom is just one. Now I'm in a good position
just to evaluate the limit by plugging in zero for x in the numerator, I get negative
two times zero times one, the denominator is just one, so my final limit is zero. In
this limit, we have a battle of forces. As x is going to infinity, one over x is going
to zero. So one plus one over x is going to one, but the exponent x is going to infinity,
it's hard to tell what's going to happen here. If we had one, to any finite number, that
would be one. But anything slightly bigger than one, as we raise it to a bigger and bigger
powers, we would expect to get infinity. So our limit has an independent permanent form,
it's hard to tell whether the answer is going to be one infinity, or maybe something in
between. Whenever I see an expression with a variable in the base, and a variable in
the exponent, I'm tempted to use logarithms. If we set y equal to one plus one over x to
the x, then if I take the natural log of both sides, I can use my log roles to rewrite that
by multiplying by x in the front. Now, if I wanted to take the limit as x goes to infinity
of ln y, that would be the limit of this product, x times ln one plus one over x. As x goes
to infinity, the first factor x goes to infinity. One plus one over x goes to just one and ln
one is going to zero. So we have a infinity times zero indeterminate form, which we can
try to rewrite as an infinity over infinity, or a zero over zero indeterminate form. Let's
rewrite this as the limit of ln one plus one over x divided by one over x. This is indeed
a zero over zero in determinant form. So we can use lobi tiles rule and take the derivative
of the top and the bottom, the derivative of the top is one over one plus one over x
times the derivative of the inside, which would be negative one over x squared. And
the derivative on the bottom, the derivative of one over x is negative one over x squared,
we can actually cancel out these two factors, and rewrite our limit as the limit as x goes
to infinity of one over one plus one over x, which is just equal to one, since one over
x is going to zero. So we found that the limit of ln y is equal to one, but we're really
interested in finding the limit of y, which we can think of as e to the ln y. Since ln
y is going to one, e to the ln y must be going to e to the one. In other words, E. So we
found that our original limit is equal to E. And in fact, you may recognize that this
limit is one of the ways of defining IE. In the previous example, we had a one to the
internet Today in determinant form, and we took logs and use log roles to write that
as an infinity times zero and determinant form. Well, the same thing can be done if
we have an infinity to the zero indeterminate form, or a zero to the zero indeterminate form. So
one to the infinity, infinity to the zero, and zero to the zero, are all indeterminate
forms that can be handled using lobi toss rule. In this video, we saw that a zero times
infinity indeterminate form could be converted to a zero over zero, or infinity over infinity
indeterminate form by rewriting f of x times g of x as f of x divided by one over g of
x, or as g of x divided by one over f of x. We also saw how to use lopi talls rule on
these three sorts of indeterminate forms by taking the ln of y, where y is our f of x
to the g of x that we want to take the limit of. This video is about Newton's method for
finding the zeros of a function, f of x. In other words, the values of x that make f of
x equal to zero. The zeros of a function can also be thought of as the x intercepts of
its graph. Suppose we want to find a solution to the equation either the x equals 4x. This
equation cannot be solved using standard algebraic methods. For example, taking the ln of both
sides doesn't really help because we still get x equals ln of 4x, which is just as hard
to solve. Instead, we can look for approximate solutions. Looking at the graph of y equals
e to the x and y equals 4x, we see there should be two solutions, one at approximately x equals
little more than two and the other around x equals maybe point three or point four.
Newton's method will allow us to make much more accurate approximations to the solution
of this equation, then we can do by just glancing at the graph. To use Newton's method, instead
of looking at the equation, e to the x equals 4x. We'll look at the equation E to the X
minus 4x equals zero. And in fact, we'll define the function f of x to be e to the x minus
4x. And look for zeros of that function. After all, finding a zero of this function is the
same as finding a solution to our original equation. So now we're trying to solve the
equivalent problem of finding the zero of the function f of x equals e to the x minus
4x. That's the function that's drawn below. I'm going to focus on this zero, the one near
to, and I'm just going to make an initial guess anything reasonably close to the actual
zero should do. So I'll just put an initial guess right here, and I'll call it x one.
Now x one is not actually zero of my function, and I'll write the point on the graph above
it as x one, f of x one. To get a better estimate for the zero of my function, I'm going to
make use of the tangent line to my function that goes through this point. So the second
step will be to find this tangent line. Since the tangent line is a reasonably good approximation
to the function, the point where the tangent line crosses the x axis should be closer to
the point where the function itself crosses the x axis, which is the point I'm looking
for. So the third step will be to find the x intercept for the tangent line. I'll call
this x intercept, x two. Now I'm just going to repeat this process. I'll use x two as
my next guess. I'll follow it up to the function where I have the point x to f of x two, and
then I'll draw a new tangent line and get a new intercept. I can repeat this process
as often as I need to, to get a sufficiently accurate approximation to my actual zero of
my function. Now that I've described the process graphically, let's find some equations that
go along with this picture. If I start with the initial guess, of x one, then the tangent
line through x one, f of x one is given by the x Bayesian y equals f of x one plus f
prime of x one times x minus x one. You might remember this equation from a section
on linearization. And it's really just comes from the formula y minus y one equals m x
minus x one that holds for any line, where m here is the derivative at x one, and y one
is f of x one. plugging into that equation, we have y minus f of x one equals f prime
of x one times x minus x one, which simplifies to y equals f of x one plus f prime of x one
times x minus x one. So that's where this linearization equation comes from. It's just
the equation of the tangent line. Now, if we want to find the x intercept of the tangent
line, we just said the tangent line equation equal to zeros,
we have zero equals f of x one plus f prime of x one times x minus x one, and we solve
for x. so this can subtract f of x one from each side, divided by f prime of x one and
solve for x. We're calling this new x intercept x two. So x two is x one minus f of x one
over f prime of x one. Now we have our second guess, x two, and we can again find the tangent
line through x two, f of x two, that tangent line will be given by the same sort of equation.
And if we then find the x intercept, the same algebraic steps, get us to the analogous equation
x three equals x two minus f of x two over f prime of x two. And more generally, as we
repeat this process over and over again, our n plus one guess is going to be given by x
n plus one equals x n minus f of x n over f prime of x n. That's the J equation at the
core of Newton's method. Now that we've got the theory down, let's grind through the problem
at hand with some numbers. Our function has the equation f of x equals e to the x minus
4x. So f prime of x is e to the x minus four. So from Newton's methods equation, we have
in general, X sub n plus one is X sub n minus e to the x sub n minus four times X sub n
over e to the x sub n minus four. Let's start with for example, x sub one equals three,
then x sub two is going to be three minus e cubed minus four times three over e cubed
minus four. plugging this into a calculator, I get x sub two equals 2.4973, and so on.
Now to cube compute x sub three, I have to take this whole number and plug that in to
my formula. I've written it out as just 2.49. But for accuracy, when I actually computed
my calculator, I'll use the entire number. my calculator gives me this answer for x of
three and continue in this process, I can get x of 4x 5x sub six. If I compute one more,
x of seven, I noticed that I have no change to my value in the number of digits that the
calculator spits out. So at this point, my Newton's methods iterations have converged.
And I have an answer that's accurate to about eight decimal places. I found one zero for
my function. And if I wanted to find the second zero, the one over here, I would just need
to start with an initial value that's close to this x coordinate, perhaps an initial value
of zero might be good. In this video, we developed an algorithm for getting increasingly accurate
approximations to the zero of a function. The central equation that we used was this
one which tells us how to get from one approximation, X sub n to the next 1x sub n plus one. When
we go from a function, say 3x plus sine x to its derivative, in this case, three plus
cosine x, that's called differentiating, or finding a derivative. Anti differentiating,
or finding an antiderivative, takes us the other direction, from a derivative to a function
that has that as its derivative. For example, if g prime of x is 3x squared,
that's the derivative. What could g of x the original function be? Well, g of x could be
x cubed, since the derivative of x cubed is 3x squared. Or it could also be g of x equals
x cubed plus seven, for example, or g of x equals x cubed plus any constant, where I
write a general constant with a capital C. That's because the derivative of a constant
zero, so the derivative of x cubed plus a constant is just going to be 3x squared, no
matter what the constant is. A function capital F of X is called an antiderivative of lowercase
F of X on an interval a, b, if the derivative, capital F prime of X is equal to lowercase
F of X on that interval a b. In other words, we can think of little f as being the derivative
of the function capital F. In the above example, x cubed is an antiderivative of 3x squared.
And in fact, x cubed plus C for any constant C is also an antiderivative of 3x squared.
When we add on a general constancy, that's sometimes referred to as a general antiderivative,
we found a general family of anti derivatives for the function 3x squared. But could there
be other anti derivatives, other functions whose derivative is 3x squared. In fact, there
are no others. And one way to think about this intuitively, is if you have two functions
with the same derivative, it's like having two runners in a race that always speed up
and slow down at exactly the same times. If one of those runners starts ahead of the other,
then the distance between them will always stay exactly the same. That's the vertical
distance drawn here on the graph. And that's the constant C, that separates one antiderivative
y equals x cubed from another y equals x cubed plus C. And in general, if capital F of X
is an antiderivative for a little f of x, then all other anti derivatives can be written
in the form capital F of x plus C for some constancy. A more rigorous justification of
this fact, can be proved using the mean value theorem, as I'll do in a separate video. If
you know the derivatives for some standard functions, then it's pretty easy to get some
anti derivatives. For example, the antiderivative of one is x. Since the derivative of x is
one, if we want to make that a general antiderivative, we can add a constant C, the antiderivative
of x is x squared over two because when I take the derivative of x squared over two,
the two that I pulled down and multiply cancels with the two in the denominator, leaving me
x. Again, I can make this a more general antiderivative by adding a constant C. More generally, the
antiderivative of x to the n for any and that's not equal to negative one is given by x to
the n plus one divided by n plus one plus a constant C. I can check this by taking the
derivative of x to the n plus one over n plus one. The n here is just a constant. So using
the power rule, I get n plus one times x to the n divided by n plus one that yields x
to the n, which is what I want it. We can think of this rule as the power rule for anti
differentiating since it's closely related to the power rule for differentiating. Now,
this rule doesn't apply when n equals negative one. Notice that we'd be dividing by zero
if n were negative one but we can handle the case when n equals negative one separately,
since x to the negative one is one of our x, we recognize that the antiderivative of
one of our x is just ln of the absolute value of x plus C. Since the derivative of ln of
the absolute value of x is one over x, please pause the video and see how many more anti
derivatives you can fill in in this table. You should get all of these formulas based
on the analogous formulas for differentiating, notice that the antiderivative of sine x is
negative cosine x not cosine x, because the derivative of cosine x is negative sine x.
If I have a constant times x to the n, I'm going to call the constant a instead of C,
since I've already got some C's floating around. If I want the antiderivative of A times x
to the n, that's just going to be a times the antiderivative of x to the n, which is
x to the n plus one over n plus one plus a constant say that's because when I take the
derivative of a constant times a function, I can just pull the constant out. More generally,
the antiderivative of a constant A times any function, little f of x is just going to equal
A times the antiderivative of little f of x, which I'll denote with capital F of X,
plus a constant C. The antiderivative of f of x plus g of x is capital F of X, plus capital
G of x plus c, where capital F and capital G are the antiderivative of lowercase F and
lowercase J. This is because the derivative of a sum is equal to the sum of the derivatives.
Let's use this information to compute the antiderivative for f of x equals five over
one plus x squared minus one over two times the square root of x. First, I'm going to
rewrite f of x as five times one over one plus x squared minus one half times x to the
minus one half. I know that the antiderivative of one over one plus x squared is arctangent
of x. And by the power rule for anti differentiating the antiderivative of x to the minus one half,
I get by raising the exponent by one, negative one half plus one is positive one half, and
then dividing by the new exponent by my constant multiplication rules, I can just multiply
by my constants. And that's my antiderivative capital F of X, I've have to remember the
plus C for the general antiderivative, I can simplify a little bit by canceling these one
halves. And I get a final answer of five times arc tan of x minus a squared of x plus C.
In this video, we introduced anti derivatives and build a table of anti derivatives based
on our knowledge of derivatives. In this video, we'll solve problems where we're given an
equation for the derivative of the function. And we're given an initial condition, something
like f of one equals seven. And we have to find the function f of x. In this first example,
suppose g prime of x is e to the x minus three times sine x. and g of two pi is five, we
need to find g of x. Well, g of x is an antiderivative of e to the x minus three sine x. So g of
x is of the form e to the x plus three cosine of x plus a constant C. That's because the
derivative of e to the x is e to the x, the derivative of cosine x is minus sine x, and
the derivative of a constant is just zero. Now I need to find the value of the constant
C that makes this initial condition come true. If I plug in two pi for x, I get e to the
two pi plus three times cosine of two pi plus C, and that needs to equal five. Since cosine
of two pi is one, I have that e to the two pi plus three plus c equals five. And so C
is equal to two minus e to the two pi. So my function g of x is equal to either the
x plus three cosine x Plus two minus e to the two pi. In this example, we're given the
second derivative of f. And we're given two initial conditions, f of one is zero, and
f of zero is two. To start, I'm going to rewrite f double prime
of x in a more manageable form. by distributing, I get the square root of x times x minus the
square root of x over x. and rewriting with exponents, we get x to the three halves minus
x to the minus one half. Next, I'm going to find f prime of x, which is the antiderivative
of f double prime of x. So f prime of x, using the power rule for anti derivatives, I raised
the exponent of three halves by one to get five halves, and then divide by the new exponent
five halves. Similarly, I raised negative one half by one to get one half and divide
by the new exponent one half. And I'll add on a constant see, let me simplify a little
here, instead of dividing by five halves, multiply by two fifths, and instead of dividing
by one half, multiply by two. Now I've got an expression for f prime of x, but I need
an expression for f of x, which is the antiderivative of f prime, and so all anti differentiate
again. So now I have two fifths times x to the seven halves over seven halves minus two
times x to the three halves over three halves, the antiderivative of a constant C is C times
x, and then I'll add on a new constant D. After simplifying a bit, I'm ready to use
my initial conditions, in order to solve for my constant C and D. When I plug in zero for
x, all my x terms vanish, I'm just left with D, so d has to equal two. So I can rewrite
my function, setting D equal to two. And now my second condition says that f of one equals
zero. So plugging in one for x, I get 430 fifths minus four thirds plus c plus two,
and that has to equal zero, which means that c is negative two, minus 430 fifths, plus
four thirds, which simplifies to minus 80 to 100, and fifths. If we plug that in for
C, we get a final answer for f of x. And that finishes the problem. In this final example,
we're not given any equations, so we have to make them up ourself, we're told that we're
standing at the edge of a cliff, at height 30 meters, with throw a tomato up in the air
at an initial velocity of 20 meters per second. The tomato then falls down to the ground due
to gravity. And we want to find how long that takes and what its velocity is at impact.
We know that the acceleration due to gravity is negative 9.8 meters per second squared.
If we're working in metric units. The similar figure if we're working in units of feet,
is negative 32 feet per second squared. The negative sign is because gravity is pulling
objects down towards the ground in the negative direction. We're also given the initial condition,
that velocity at time zero is 20 meters per second. That's a positive velocity because
we're throwing the tomato up. And we're told that the initial position s of zero is 30
meters. So let's start with the equation that acceleration is negative 9.8. In other words,
S double prime of t is negative 9.8. Therefore, S prime of t is negative 9.8 t plus a constant
c one. And from my initial condition about velocity, I know that s prime of zero is 20.
So in other words, S prime of zero is negative 9.8 times zero plus c one that has to equal
20. Which means that c one is equal to 20. Substituting in 20 for C one, I can rewrite
s prime of t Now I can find f of t, the antiderivative of S prime. And that's going to be negative
9.8 times t squared over two plus 20 t plus a second constant C two. Using my second initial condition, f of zero
equals 30. I can plug in zero for t, and get an expression that equals 30. Since all the
terms drop out, besides the C two, that tells me that C two is 30. And so I can find my
equation position by substituting 34 c two. Now I want to find out how long it takes the
tomato to hit the ground. So that's going to be the time when s of t equals zero. Setting
zero equal to my expression for S of t, I can use the quadratic formula to solve for
t, and I get t equals approximately negative 1.17, or 5.25. The negative time doesn't make
sense for the problem. So I'm left with a time of impact of 5.25 seconds. Now to find
the velocity of the impact, I need to plug that time into my velocity equation. In other
words, my equation for S prime. So s prime of 5.25, is 9.8 times 5.25, plus 20, which
simplifies to negative 31.45 meters per second, probably enough to squash the tomato. And
that's all for this video on finding anti derivatives using initial conditions. In this
video, I'll use the mean value theorem to show that the antiderivative zero has to be
a constant. And then any two anti derivatives of the same function have to differ by a constant.
In a previous video, I stated the fact that if f of x is one antiderivative of a function,
little f of x, than any other antiderivative of that same function can be written in the
form capital F of x plus C for some constant C. In other words, any two antiderivative
of the same function have to differ by a constant. To prove this fact, let's first note that
if the derivative of a function, g prime of x is equal to zero on an interval than the
original function, g of x must equal C for some constant C. This statement follows from
the mean value theorem, because the mean value theorem tells us that for any x one and x
two in our interval, the average rate of change between x one and x two is equal to the derivative
at some number x three in between x one and x two. But by assumption, g prime is zero
everywhere on the interval, so g prime of x three must be equal to zero. This means
that our numerator, g of x want to minus g of x one has to equal zero. In other words,
g of x two is equal to g of x one, but that's true for any x one and x two. So all the values
of G are equal, and G must be a constant. The second observation that I want to make
is that if G one and G two are two functions, which have the same derivative, then g one
of x must equal g two of x plus C for some constant C. This statement follows from the
previous statement, because if G one prime of x is equal to g two prime of x, then g
one prime of x minus g two prime of x must equal zero. But that means if I look at the
function g one of x minus g two of x, and take its derivative, that has to equal zero,
since the derivative The difference is the difference of the derivatives. Now our previous
statement tells us that if the derivative of a function is zero, the function must be
a constant, and therefore, g one of x minus g two of x equals C for some constant C, which
means that g one of x is equal to g two of x plus C, which is what we wanted to prove.
So we've proved that any two functions with the same derivative have to differ by a constant
or in other words, If capital F of X is one antiderivative of a function than any other
antiderivative must be of the form capital F of x plus C. This concludes the proof that
any two anti derivatives of a particular function must differ by a constant. This video will
review summation notation, that is, the sigma notation used to write a song. In this expression, using the greek capital
letter sigma, the letter I is called the index. The number one is called the lower limit of
summation, or the starting index. And the number five is called the upper limit of summation,
or the ending index, we evaluate this expression by summing up to the I, for all values of
i starting from one and ending at five and stepping through the integers. In other words,
we start with i equals one and take two to the one. And then we add to it two to the
two, two to the Three, two to the four, and two to the five. If we do the arithmetic,
this comes out to 62. In the second expression, our index is J, and we start with J equals
three and go up to J equals seven, once again, stepping through integer values. So we have
to add up 1/3 plus 1/4, plus 1/5, plus one, six, and then our last term is one seven.
This sum is equal to 153, over 140. When we're given a psalm like this one, it can be handy
to write it in sigma notation, because it's more compact. But to do so, we have to look
for the pattern between the terms. In this case, the terms all differ by three. So I
can think of nine as being six plus three, and 12, as being six plus twice, three, and
15 as being six plus three times three, and so on. In fact, we can even think of six itself
as being six plus zero times three to fit this pattern. Now we can write the sum as
sigma of six plus i times three, where I ranges from zero to four. Here, we're thinking of
six plus three as six plus one times three. Now, there are other ways to write this sum
and sigma notation. For example, we could notice that each of the terms is a multiple
of three. And in fact, six is three times two, nine is three times three, and so on.
And so we could write our sum as sigma of three times n, where n ranges from two to
six. The choice of the letter we use for the index doesn't matter at all. For example,
we could also write this as sigma from K equals two to six of three times k. Here, k and n
play the same role. Please pause the video for a moment and try to write this next example
in sigma notation. Since the denominators are powers of two, we could write the denominators
as two to the i, where i ranges from two to five. The numerators are one less than the
denominators, so we can write the numerators as two to the i minus one was we're adding
these terms up, we write sigma, and we I go from two to five. In this video, we reviewed
summation notation, or sigma notation for writing sums. In this video, we'll approximate
the area under a curve using tall skinny rectangles, this will introduce the idea of an integral.
Let's start by approximating the area under this curve y equals x squared in between x
equals zero, and x equals three by approximating it with six rectangles. There's several ways to do this. For example,
I could draw rectangles for the right side of each rectangle is as tall as the curve.
We'll call this using write endpoints. Alternatively, we could line up our rectangles, so the left
side of each rectangle is as high as the curve. We'll call this use Left endpoints. Notice
that the leftmost rectangle in this picture is degenerate and has height zero. If we're
using the picture with the right endpoints, then the base of each rectangle has size one
half. And the height of each rectangle is given by the value of our function, y equals
x squared on the right side of the rectangle. So for example, the area of the first rectangle
is its base times its height, which is point five times 0.5 squared. The 0.5 squared comes
from me evaluating the function at this point 0.5 to get the height. Similarly, the area
of the second rectangle is going to be also base times height basis, still point five,
and now the height is going to be one squared, or one. If we continue like this, and add
up all our areas, we get the area of all six rectangles is given by this expression. Notice
that there are six terms here, one for each rectangle, each rectangle has base of point
five, and has height given by the right endpoint, we can write this in sigma notation as the
sum of 0.5 times 0.5 times i squared, where I ranges from one to six. This works because
the numbers in parentheses here are all multiples of point five. The first one is point five
times one, and the last one, three is point five times six. Now if we compute the sum,
we get 91 eighths, which is 11.375. Notice from the picture, that the sum of areas of
rectangles is an over estimate for the area under the curve, we can do the same sort of
computation for this green picture using left endpoints, and we'll get an under estimate
for the area under the curve, I invite you to try it for yourself before going on with
the video. For the green rectangles, the first rectangle has area zero, the second rectangle
has area given by its base of 0.5 times its height of 0.5 squared. And if we compute all
six areas and add them up, we get a similar expression to the previous one, only this
time, we end with a 2.5 squared, which is the height of our last rectangle. One way
to write this in sigma notation, is still starting with i equals one for the first rectangle
to six for the last one, we use the base. And then for the height, we use 0.5 times
I minus one, squared. This works because when I is one, i minus
one is zero, so we start with a height of zero like we should. And when I is six, we
get point five times six minus one, which is point five times five, or 2.5, just like
we want it to be, if we add up the sum, we get an answer of 55 eighths, which is equal
to 6.875, which is an underestimate for the true area under the curve. Now there's a big
gap between 6.875 and 11.375. So it'd be nice to get tighter bounds on the area. One way
to do this is by using more rectangles, for example, 12 rectangles instead of six. Again,
we could choose to use right endpoints, which gives us an over estimate of area in this
case, or we could use left endpoints, which gives us an under estimate. The area of the
eyes rectangle is given by the base times the height, and the base is going to be in
this case 0.25. While the height is given by the functions value on the right endpoint,
the right endpoint of the eyes rectangle is going to be 0.25 times I and the function
is the squaring function. So that height will be given by point two, five i squared. The
area of all the rectangles can then be given by the sum from i equals one to 12 for the
12 rectangles of 0.25 times 0.25 i squared. If we work out that sum, it comes to 10.156.
Again, we can do the same thing with left endpoints. Now the area of the eye, the rectangle,
is given by base times height, which is point two, five. And now the height is given by
the value of the function on the left endpoint. So that's going to be 0.25 times I minus one.
And we need to square that, since our function y equals x squared is giving the height of
my rectangles. So the area of all the rectangles together is going to be the sum from the first
rectangle to the 12th rectangle of 0.25 times 0.25, times I minus one squared. That works out to 7.906. So we're honing in
on the actual area under the curve. Now it's somewhere between about eight and about 10,
we can keep getting better and better estimates of area by using more and more rectangles.
For example, if we want to use 100 rectangles, then our area of all rectangles using right
endpoints is going to be given by the sum from i equals one to 100 of the basis times
the heights. Now the base of each rectangle will be 100 of the length here from zero to
three. In other words, the base will be three over 100. The eyes right endpoint, which I'll
call X sub i, is going to be just three over 100 times I, since you get to the right eye
threat endpoint by taking I copies of a rectangle of width three one hundredths. Therefore,
the eyes height is going to be given by this is right endpoint squared, or three one hundredths
times i squared. So we can write our sum of areas as sigma from i equals one to 100 of
three one hundredths times three one hundredths times i squared. The formula using left endpoints
is similar. The if left endpoint is going to be three one hundredths, times I minus
one, since if we're using left endpoints, we only have to travel through i minus one
rectangles to get to the left endpoint of the rectangle. So our area for the left endpoints
becomes the sum from i equals one to 100 of three over 100 times three over 100 times
I minus one squared. These two psalms work out to be 9.1435 and 8.8654. At this point,
you might be willing to wager a guess that our exact area under the curve is probably
going to be nine. But to determine the exact area for sure, let's do this process of dividing
into rectangles one more time. And this time, we'll just use an rectangles where n is some
big number. Since we're dividing an interval of length three into n little pieces, the
width of each sub interval, in other words, the base of each rectangle, we'll be given
by three over n. I'll call this delta x as a little tiny bit of x. Now the right endpoint,
x by is given by three over n times i. Since we have to travel through I rectangles, each
of width three over n on order to get to that right endpoint. So our height, H sub i is
given by the functions value on that right endpoint. We can work out similar expressions
for the picture using left endpoints here. Our estimate of area using right endpoints
is then the sum from i equals one to n of three over n times three I over n squared.
And our estimate using left endpoints is a sum from i equals one to n of three over n
times three, i minus one over n squared, the more rectangles we use, in other words, the
bigger the value of n, the closer our estimated area will be to our exact area under the curve.
And therefore, the exact area is given by the limit the limit as n goes to infinity
of this song, which is known as a Riemann sum, there are really two possible limits, we could
use right endpoints or left endpoints. But as the picture suggests, these two limits
should turn out to be the same thing. In fact, there are other options between sides using
right endpoints and left endpoints, we could, for example, use the midpoints of our intervals
to compute our areas of rectangles. And that limit should also end up as the same thing.
So we have an expression for the area under the curve y equals x squared between the values of x equals one and x equals three.
And that's given by the limit of this psalm called a Riemann sum. I'll stick with the
right endpoint version for now, to compute the exact area, we have to evaluate this limit,
which is tricky. I'm going to start by rewriting. Since three and n don't involve the index
I, I can pull them outside of this summation sign. I'll clean this up a little bit. Now
will you need to use the fact that the sum of the first n squares of the integers is
equal to n times n plus one times two n plus one over six, we can check that formula for a few values
of n. For example, if n equals two, we're summing out one squared plus two squared,
which is five. And we're plugging in two times two plus one times four plus one over six
from the formula, which also equals five. If we use this formula, in our limit calculation,
we get this expression, which simplifies to nine halves, by dividing 27 by six, we can
cancel a copy of n and get n plus one times two n plus one over n squared. I'm going to
pull out the nine halves. And now I observe I have the limit of a rational expression,
where the highest power term on the numerator is going to be two n squared, the highest
power and there's nominators just the n squared, so that's going to be a limit of two, multiply
that by by nine halves, and I get a limit of nine, just like I expected from the previous
work. So that was a big production. But we did successfully find the area under the curve,
and it was nine. In this video, we approximated the area under a curve by taking the limit
as the number of rectangles goes to infinity of the area of the rectangles, which is given
by a psalm called a Riemann sum of the basis times the heights of the rectangles. The basis
are often written as delta x, and the heights are given by the function value on the left
endpoint, or the right endpoint, or some other point in the interval. For our purposes, f
was always x squared. But this sort of expression, called a Riemann sum, can be used more generally,
to evaluate the area under any continuous function. In previous sections, we thought
of the definite integral as representing area, and we've computed it as a number. In this
section, we'll think of the integral itself as a function of the bounds of integration.
And we'll describe the first part of the fundamental theorem relating the derivative and the integral.
Suppose f of x has the graph shown here, and let g of x be the integral from one to x of
f of t dt. I'm using t as my variable inside my integrand Here, just to distinguish it
from the variable x that I'm using in my bounds of integration, this expression just means
the net area between one and some value x on the x axis. I'll call geovax, the accumulated
area function, because as x increases, g of x, measures how much net area has accumulated.
Let's calculate and plot some values of g of x. g of one is the integral from one to
one of f of t, dt, that's just zero. Since the bounds of integration here the same, g
of two is the integral from one to two of f of t, dt. That's the net area from one to
two, which is to square units. g of three is the integral from one to three. Now, we've
added on an additional two units here, and an additional one unit up here from this triangle,
for a total of five, g of four is g of three with some additional area tacked on the additional area measures three units. So g of four is
eight. Please pause the video and fill in the next few values of J. When we go from g of four to g of five, we
add on an extra unit of area. So g of five is nine. As we go from g of five to g of six,
we start accumulating negative area, because f is now below the x axis. So here I've accumulated
one unit of negative area, which means that g of six is one less than g of five. In other
words, gf six is eight, g of seven is five. Since we accumulate three more units of negative
area, to find g of zero, the integral from one to zero of f of t dt, I'm going to rewrite
this integral as negative the integral from zero to one of f of t dt. Since there are
two units of area between zero and one, g of zero is negative to apply all these values
of G on these coordinate axes, and connect the dots to get an idea of what g of x looks
like. Now let's think about the derivative g prime of x. We know that g prime of x is
positive, where g of x is increasing, but g of x is increasing, wherever we're adding
on positive area, that is when f of x is positive. So we have that g prime of x is positive,
where f is x is positive. Also, g prime of x is negative, where g of x is
decreasing. That happens when we're adding on negative area because f of x is negative.
So we can see that g prime of x is negative, where f of x is negative. Also, g prime is
zero at this local maximum, where f is zero. At that instant, we're not adding on any positive
or negative area. If we look a little closer, we can see the
rate at which g of x is increasing depends on the height of f of x. When f of x is tall,
or high, we're adding on area very quickly. While when f of x is low or small, we're adding
on area more slowly. So the rate of change of G. In other words, g prime of x is behaving
very much like the function f of x itself. And in fact, it turns out that g prime of
x is equal to f of x. This is the first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus Part One
says that of f of x is a continuous function on the closed interval from a to b, then for
any x in this interval, the function g of x, the integral from a to x of f of t dt is
continuous on the interval a b and differentiable on the inside of this interval, and for Furthermore,
g prime of x is equal to f of x, as we saw in the previous example. The proof of this
fact relies on a limit definition of derivative, and can be found in a later video. For now,
let's do some examples based on this fact. First, let's find the derivative with respect
to x of the integral from five to x of the square root of t squared plus three dt. The
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus tells us that this expression here thought of as a function
of x is differentiable, and its derivative is just the integrand function evaluated on
x. This is great, we don't have to do any work here at all. To evaluate the derivative,
we just plug in x, where we see the T here, the derivative and the second expression is
also the square root of x squared plus three, it might seem odd that these two expressions
have the same derivative. But remember, in both cases, we're taking the derivative of
the accumulated area function. And the rate at which area accumulates doesn't depend on
the lower bound of the integral. That is, it doesn't depend on where we start counting,
it just depends on the height of the function at x. For this third example, remember that the
integral from x to four is the same thing as the negative of the integral from four
to x. So we get the negative of the derivative from four to x. and applying the fundamental
theorem of calculus, this lesson is negative the square root of x squared plus three, it
makes sense that we should get a negative answer for this example. When we're integrating
from X to four, then as x increases, our area actually decreases. So our accumulated area
function should have a negative derivative. This last example is more complicated, because
instead of just having x as our upper bound, we have a function of x sine of x, we can
think of sine of x as being the inside function, and the accumulated area function as being
an outside function and apply the chain rule. In general, the chain rule says that we have
the derivative with respect to x of a function of u of x, then that's the same thing as the
derivative with respect to u of that function at U times the derivative of the inside function
u of x with respect to x, applying the chain rule to our accumulated area function, where
you have x is sine x, we have that the derivative respect to x of the integral from four to
sine x of the integral of t squared plus three DT can be written as the derivative by two
you, I've accumulated area function from four to you have the integrand times the derivative
with respect to x of our u of x, which is just sine x, we can apply the fundamental
theorem of calculus to calculate the first derivative. By just plugging in you for T,
we get you squared plus three. And then the derivative of sine x, of course, is just cosine
of x. Since we want our final answer to be entirely in terms of x, we're going to rewrite
this as the square root of sine x squared plus three times cosine x, or just the square
root of sine squared x plus three times cosine of x. We could have gotten this answer more
quickly by just plugging in this entire expression sine of x in where we saw the T here in the
integrand, and then multiplying the answer by the derivative of sine x due to the chain
rule. This video introduced the fundamental theorem
of calculus part one that says that the derivative of the integral of a function is just the
original function in some sense, taking the derivative and does the process of taking
the integral. derivatives and integrals are closely related. inverse operations. This
video introduces the second part of the fundamental theorem of calculus. Another way of relating
derivatives and integrals. Part Two of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that
if f is a continuous function on the closed interval a b, then the integral from a to
b of f of x dx is equal to capital F of b minus capital F of A, where capital F is any
antiderivative for lowercase F. That is, capital F is a function whose derivative is lowercase
F. The proof of part two of the fundamental theorem of calculus follows directly from
part one. And I'll give that proof in another video. But here, I just want to make a few
comments about what this theorem means. If we think of f of x as the derivative of capital
F of x, then this is saying that the integral of the derivative is equal to the original
function evaluated on the endpoints. I also want to comment on the phrasing any antiderivative.
Suppose capital G of X is a different antiderivative for lowercase F. We know that any two anti
derivatives differ by a constant. So we know that g of x has to equal capital F of X plus
some constant. So if we take g of b minus g of a, that's going to be the same thing
as f of b plus c minus f of a plus C. And since this constant sees subtract out to cancel
here, this is just f of b minus f of a. So this difference is the same value, no matter
which antiderivative of lowercase f we use. And that's why we can say that capital F can
be any antiderivative. Part Two of the fundamental theorem of calculus is super useful, because
it allows us to compute integrals simply by finding anti derivatives and evaluating them.
Finding anti derivatives tends to be really easy. Computing integrals, using the Riemann
sum definition is really hard. And so because of the fundamental theorem of calculus, we
don't have to go through all those lengthy and tedious computations, we've involving
limits of areas of rectangles, all we have to do to evaluate an integral is find an antiderivative,
and evaluate it. Let's see how this works in some examples. In this first example, the
antiderivative of 3x squared is x cubed. And the antiderivative of negative four over x
is minus four times ln absolute value of x. We could add a plus C to make it a general
antiderivative, but we don't really need it. The fundamental theorem says that we can use
any antiderivative, so we might as well use the simplest one, where c equals zero. Now
we need to evaluate this antiderivative on the endpoints of negative one and negative
five. And we usually write this as a vertical line with a negative one at the bottom and
a negative five at the top to mean evaluation. In other words, the notation capital F of X between A and B means capital F of b minus
capital F of A, which is what we need to compute for our antiderivative here. So now we just
plug in negative five for x, and then we subtract what we get when we plug in negative one for
x. In this example, you can see why it's important to write the antiderivative of one over x
as ln absolute value of x not just ln of x, because ln of the absolute value of five,
which is ln a five actually has an answer, whereas ln of negative five would not exist.
I can simplify this expression a little bit, I get negative 125 minus four ln five minus
negative one, plus four ln of one. Since ln of one is zero, this becomes negative 124
minus four ln five. That's about negative 130 point 438. In this next example, we need
to find the antiderivative for this expression y squared minus y plus one over the square
root Why. Now we can't take the antiderivative separately of the numerator and the denominator,
because that's just not how the quotient rule works for differentiation. So it doesn't work
that way for anti differentiation either. Instead, let's try to simplify this expression
to make it look more like something we can take the antiderivative of. So I'm going to
rewrite the denominator as y to the one half power. And dividing by y to the one half is
the same thing as multiplying by y to the negative one half distributed, distributing
and adding exponents, I get y to the three halves minus y to the one half plus y to the
negative one half. Now that's something I can take the antiderivative of just using
the power rule and reverse y to the three halves, becomes y to the five halves by adding
one to the exponent, I divide by the new exponent. Now here, I get y to the three halves divided
by three halves, and here are negative one half plus one is positive one half, I need
to evaluate this between four and one. let me simplify a little bit. And now I'll substitute
in values. Now four to the five halves is the same thing as four to the one half raised
to the fifth power. So that's two to the fifth power, or 32. Similarly, for the three halves
is four to the one half cubed, so that's two cubed, or eight, and four to the one half
is just two. And one to any power is just one. And after some arithmetic, I get an answer
of 146 15th. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, part
two can be stated this way, for a function capital F with continuous derivative, the
integral of the derivative is equal to the original function evaluated on the bounds
of integration. In this video, I'll prove both parts of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
The first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that if f of x is a continuous
function, then the function g of x defined as the integral from a constant A to the variable
x of f of t dt is differentiable, and has derivative equal to the original function, f of x. To prove this theorem, let's start with the
limit definition of derivative. The derivative, g prime of x, by definition, is the limit
as h goes to zero of g of x plus h minus g of x over h. Now g of x is defined as an integral
from a to x. So g of x plus h is going to be the integral from a to x plus h, just plugging
in x plus h for x of f of t dt. g of x is the integral from a to x of f of t dt. By properties of integrals. The integral from
a to x plus h minus the integral from a to x is just the integral from x to x plus h.
Now informally, the integral from x to x plus h can be closely approximated by a skinny
rectangle with height, f of x and width, H. And so this limit is approximately the limit
as h goes to zero of f of x times h over h, which is just f of x. But let's make this
argument a little more precise. Let's let capital M be the maximum value that f of x
achieves on this little sub interval, and lowercase m be the minimum value achieved.
In this picture, they occur on the endpoints of the interval from x to x plus h, but they
could also occur somewhere in the interior. But we know that f of x does have to have
a minimum value and a maximum value, since it's a continuous function by assumption on
a closed interval. Now we know that the integral of f of t dt from x to x plus h has to be
less than or equal to capital M times h and bigger than a to lowercase m times h. This
is one of the properties of integrals, and can be verified visually by comparing this
shaded red area to the small blue rectangle, which has area lowercase m times h, and comparing
it to the area of the big rectangle, which has area capital M times h equivalently, the
integral from x to x plus H of F of t dt divided by h has to be less than or equal to capital
M and greater than or equal to little m. But the intermediate value theorem, which holds
for all continuous functions, says that this intermediate value that lies between the minimum
and maximum value of f has to be achieved as f of c for some C in the interval. Therefore,
I cannot replace this integral in the limit expression above by just simply the value
f of c for some c between x and x plus h. The value of C here depends on x and h. But
as h goes to zero, C has to get closer and closer to x. And since f is continuous, this
means that this limit is equal to f of x. We've now proved the first part of the fundamental
theorem of calculus, that the derivative of g exists and equals f of x. The second part
of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that if f is continuous, then the integral
from a to b of f of x dx is equal to the antiderivative of lowercase F, which I'll denote by capital
F, evaluated at B minus that antiderivative evaluated today. Part Two of the fundamental
theorem follows directly from part one. Let's let g of x be defined as the integral from
a to x of f of t dt. Then part one of the fundamental theorem of calculus tells us that
g prime of x exists and equals lowercase f of x. In other words, capital G is an antiderivative
for a lowercase F. Now g of the minus g of A is by definition, the integral from a to
b of f of t dt minus the integral of a from a to a of f of t dt. The second integral is
zero, since the bounds of integration are identical. So part two of the fundamental
theorem of calculus is true if I use the antiderivative capital G. But the theorem is supposed to be true for
any antiderivative. So let's let capital F be any antiderivative of lowercase F, we know
that capital F of x has to equal capital G of X plus some constant since any two antiderivative
for the same function differ by a constant, and therefore, capital F of b minus capital
F of A is going to equal capital G of B plus C minus capital G of A plus C. The constant
C cancels out, and we just get capital G of b minus capital G of A, which we already saw
was equal to the integral from a to b of lowercase f of t dt. So the left side of this equation
is equal to the right side. And the fundamental theorem of calculus Part two is proved for
any antiderivative. This completes the proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus. This
video is about the substitution method for evaluating integrals, also known as u substitution.
As the first example, let's try to integrate to x sine of x squared dx. Now sine of x squared
is the composition of the function sine and the function x squared. And notice that the
function x squared has derivative to x, which is sitting right here and the integrand. I'm
going to make the substitution u equals x squared, and then I'll write d u is equal
to 2x dx. That's differential notation. To find d u, I take the derivative have X squared
and then multiply by the differential dx, I can then rewrite the integrand as sine of
u. And the 2x. dx becomes do after making this substitution, I can integrate, because
the antiderivative of sine of u is negative cosine of u. And I'll add on the constant
of integration. I'm not finished yet, my original problem was in terms of x, and now I've got
a function in terms of u. So let's substitute back in since u is equal to x squared, I can
replace that, and I have my final answer. To verify that this final answer is correct,
that it really is the antiderivative of what we started with, let's take the derivative
of our answer and make sure we get back the function to x sine of x squared. If we take the derivative of negative cosine
of x squared plus C, then we get the derivative of a constant is zero, so we have the derivative
of negative cosine, that's equal to sine of the inside function x squared times the derivative
of the inside function using the chain rule. And we do in fact, get back to the integrand
that we started with. Notice that we use the chain rule when taking the derivative to check
our answer. Let's try some more examples of use substitution. When looking for what to
substitute as you, it's good to look for a chunk that's in the integrand, whose derivative
is also in the integrand. It's also good enough to just have a constant multiple of the derivative
in the integrand. So in the first example, we might use the chunk one plus 3x squared,
as are you. The derivative of that expression is six times x. And even though six times
x isn't completely in the integrand, we do have a factor of x in the numerator, that's
just a constant multiple away from the derivative of 6x. So let's write out d u, that's going
to be 6x dx. And I'm going to go ahead and rewrite this as x dx is equal to one six d
U. writing it this way, it makes it easy to substitute one six d u for x dx. And then
in my denominator, my one plus 3x squared becomes u. I can rewrite this as one six times
the integral of one over u d u you and I recognize that the antiderivative of one over u is ln
absolute value of u. Substituting back in for you, I get a final answer of one six ln
absolute value of one plus 3x squared, plus say, the absolute value signs are not really
necessary in this example, since one plus 3x squared is always positive. As our next
example, let's look at the integral of e to the 7x dx. one chunk with us here is u equals
7x. If we do that, then d u is just seven dx. And so we have dx is equal to 1/7 do substituting
in we have the integral of e to the u times 1/7 d u, I can pull the 1/7 out and integrate
e to the u to the app, just either the U and substituting in for back for 7x, I get e to
the 7x plus C. I encourage you to pause the video to check that these two answers are
correct. By taking derivatives. You'll notice that you use the chain rule each time. Next,
let's do an example with a definite integral, the integral from E to E squared of ln x over
x dx. If we set u equal to ln x, then d u is the derivative of ln x, that's one of our
x times dx. This is a much better choice of you than say setting u equal to x from the
denominator, because then d u would just be dx. And when we did the substitution, nothing
would really change. For definite integrals, we need to deal with the bounds of integration
here e and d squared. We really have two options, worry about them now or worry about them later.
I'll show you the worry about them. Now method first. Our bounds of integration E and E squared
are values of Bax as we convert everything in our integral from x to you, we need to
convert the bounds of integration from values of x to values of u also. Now, when x is equal
to e, u is equal to ln IV, which is one, just using this equation. Similarly, when x is
equal to E squared, u is equal to ln t squared, which is two. So as I rewrite my integral,
I'm going to replace the bounds with one and two. And now my ln x becomes my u and my dx
divided by x becomes my do, they're going to grow of UD u is equal to use squared over
two, and I evaluate this between the bounds of u equals two and u equals one to get two
squared over two minus one squared over two, which is one half. Notice that when we did
the problem this way, we never actually had to get back to our variable x, we stayed in
the variable u and evaluated. The second way of dealing with the bounds of integration
is to worry about them later. Let's go back to the beginning of the problem. We're just
about to substitute u equals ln x and d u equals one over x dx. Instead of substituting
in for the bounds of integration, I'm going to temporarily ignore them and just evaluate
the indefinite integral ln x over x dx, which I can substitute in as you times do, we can
evaluate that to get you squared over two. Normally we'd have a plus c constant. But
since we're ultimately going to be doing a definite integral, we don't really need the
constant here. Now, just like when we're doing indefinite integrals, I'm going to get back
to the variable x by substituting back in for you U is ln of x. So I square that and
divided by two, and then I can go back to my original bounds of integration, those bounds
are the x values of E squared, and E. Plugging in those bounds, I get ln of E squared quantity
squared over two minus ln of E squared over two, which evaluates to two squared over two
minus one over two, which is again, one half. This video gave some examples of use substitution
to evaluate integrals. This method works great in examples like this one, where there's a
chunk that you can call you whose derivative or at least a constant multiple of its derivative
is also in the integrand. You've already seen how u substitution works
in practice. In this video, I'll try to explain why it works. u substitution is based on the
chain rule. Recall the chain rule says if we take the derivative of a function, capital
F of lowercase g of x with respect to x, we get the derivative of capital F evaluated
on the inside function g of x times the derivative of g of x. If we just write that equation in the opposite
order, we have that an expression of the form f prime of g of x times g prime of x can all
be wrapped up as the derivative of a composite function, f of g of x. Now if I take the integral
of both sides of this equation with respect to x, on the right side, I'm taking the integral of a derivative. Well, the integral or antiderivative of a
derivative is just the original function, capital f of g of x plus C. Now when we do
use substitution, we're really just writing this equation down. We are seeing an expression
of the form f prime of g of x times g prime of x dx, we're recognizing you as g of x and
d u as g prime of x dx. So we're rewriting this expression as the integral of capital
F prime of u d u do and that integrates to just capital F of u plus C. And then we're
substituting back in for you To get capital f of g of x plus C, the beginning and end
of this process are exactly the same as the left side and right side of our chain rule
expression above. So when you're doing u substitution to integrate, you can thank this chain rule
that's behind it all. This video introduces the idea of an average value of a function.
To take the average of a finite list of numbers, we just add the numbers up and divide by n,
the number of numbers. In summation notation, we write the sum from i equals one to n of
Q i all divided by n. But defining the average value of a continuous function is a little
different. Because a function can take on infinitely many values on an interval from
a to b, we could estimate the average value of the function by sampling it at a finite
Li many evenly spaced x values. I'll call them x one through x n. And let's assume that
they're spaced a distance of delta x apart, then the average value of f at these sample
points is just the sum of the values of f divided by n, the number of values are in
summation notation, the sum from i equals one to n of f of x i all divided by n. This
is an approximate average value of f, since we're just using n sample points. But the
approximation gets better as the number of sample points n gets bigger and bigger. So
we could define the average as the limit as n goes to infinity of the sample average.
I'd like to make this look more like a Riemann sum. So I need to get delta x in there. So
I'm just going to multiply the top and the bottom by delta x. And notice that n times
delta x is just the length of the interval b minus a. Now as the number of sample points
goes to infinity, delta x, the distance between them goes to zero. So I can rewrite my limit
as the limit as delta x goes to zero, of the sum of FX II times delta x divided by b minus
a. Now the limit of this Riemann sum in the numerator is just the integral from a to b
of f of x dx. And so the average value of the function is given by the integral on the
interval from a to b divided by the length of the interval. Notice the similarity between
the formula for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a
list of numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the
list of numbers. And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to
n, the number of numbers in the list of numbers. Now let's work an example. For the function
g of x equals one over one minus 5x. On the interval from two to five, we know that the
average value of G is given by the integral from two to five of one over one minus 5x
dx divided by the length of that interval, I'm going to use use of the tuition to integrate,
so I'm going to set u equal to one minus 5x. So d u is negative five dx. In other words,
dx is negative 1/5 times do. Looking at my bounds of integration, when x is equal to
two, u is equal to one minus five times two, which is negative
nine. And when x is equal to five, u is equal to negative 24. substituting into my integral,
I get the integral from negative nine to negative 24 of one over u times negative 1/5. Do and
that's divided by three. Now dividing by three is same as multiplying by 1/3. And as I integrate,
I'm going to pull the negative 1/5 out and then take the integral of one over u, that's
ln of the absolute value of u evaluated in between negative 24 and negative nine. The
absolute value signs are important here because they prevent me from trying to take the natural
log of negative numbers to evaluate get negative 1/15 times ln of 24 minus ln
of nine, I can use my log rolls to simplify and get negative 1/15 ln of 24 over nine,
that's negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and as a decimal, that's approximately negative
0.0654. So I found the average value of G. Now my next question is, does g ever achieve
that average value, in other words, is there a number c in the interval from two to five
for which GFC equals its average value? Well, one way to find out is just to set GFC equal
to G's average value. In other words, set one over one minus five c equal to negative
1/15 ln of eight thirds, and try to solve for C. There are lots of ways to solve this
equation. But I'm going to take the reciprocal of both sides, subtract one from both sides
and divide by negative five. This simplifies to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5,
which is approximately 3.25. And that x value does lie inside the interval from two to five.
So we've demonstrated that g does achieve its average value over the interval. But in
fact, we could have predicted this to be true. Gs average value has to lie somewhere between
GS minimum value and maximum value on this interval. And since G is continuous on the
interval from two to five, it has to achieve every value that lies in between as minimum
and maximum, including its average value. The same argument shows that for any continuous
function, the function must achieve its average value on an interval. And this is known as
the mean value theorem for integrals. Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval
from a to b, there has to be at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of
c equals its average value, or, in symbols, f of c equals the integral from A b of f of
x dx divided by b minus a. This video gave the definition of an average value of a function,
and stated the mean value theorem for integrals. If we rewrite the formula for average value
a little, then we can see a geometric interpretation for average value, the area of the box with
height the average value is the same as the area under the curve. This video gives two
proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals. the mean value theorem for integrals says
the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b, there's some number
c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value of f. The first proof
that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem. Recall that the intermediate
value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f, defined on an interval, which
I'll call x 1x, two, if we have some number l in between f of x one and f of x two, then
f has to achieve the value out somewhere between x one and x two. Keeping in mind the intermediate
value theorem, let's turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals. Now
it's possible that our function f of x might be constant on the interval from a to b. But
if that's true, then our mean value theorem for integrals holds easily, because f AV is
just equal to that constant, which is equal to f OC for any c between A and B. So let's
assume that f is not constant. Well, like continuous function on a closed interval has
to have a minimum value and a maximum value, which I'll call little m, and big M. Now we
know that F's average value on the interval has to be between its maximum value and its
minimum value. If you don't believe this, consider the fact that all of us values on
the interval have to lie between big M and little m. And if we integrate this inequality We get little m times b minus a is less than
or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a. Notice
that the first and the last integrals, we're just integrating a constant. Now if I divide
all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average
value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted. Now, I just need to apply the
intermediate value theorem, with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my
values of f of x one and f of x two. The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved
by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two. And therefore, for some C in my interval
a b. And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals. Now I'm going to give a second
proof for the mean value theorem for integrals. And this time, it's going to be as a corollary
to the regular mean value theorem for functions. Recall that the mean value theorem
for functions, says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that
interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at
C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the
mean value theorem for integrals. I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral
from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value
theorem for integrals. Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is
zero, while g of B is the integral from a to b of our function. Now, by the fundamental
theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval
a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x. And by the mean value theorem for functions,
we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some numbers,
C and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below,
we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus
a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach. This shows that the mean
value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our
function is an integral. And this completes the second proof of the main value theorem
for integrals. So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different
ways. And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way. 

Transcript for: Calculus 2 - Full College Course
Hi, I'm Beau with Free Code Camp. This course
is taught by Dr. Linda green. She teaches at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, and she has been teaching calculus two for many years to undergraduate students,
we recommend using a paper and pencil so you can follow along at home. Let's start. Hi, I'm Beau with Free Code Camp. This course
is taught by Dr. Linda green. She teaches at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, and she has been teaching calculus two for many years to undergraduate students,
we recommend using a paper and pencil so you can follow along at home. Let's start. This video introduces the idea of finding
the area between two curves. Let's start with some review. in calculus one, you approximate
the area between a curve and the x axis by dividing it up into tall skinny rectangles.
You represented the width of one of these rectangles using the symbols delta x, here
delta x means a small distance along the x axis or a small change in x values. You picked
out an x value called a sample point from each of these little sub intervals along the
x axis, one sample point for each rectangle. The sample point on the x axis for rectangle
number i is denoted by x i star. You use the sample points and the function f to figure
out the height of each rectangle. The height of rectangle number i is given by the functions
value on the sample point f of x star. From this, you calculate the area of each rectangle,
the area of a rectangle is base times height. So the area of the first rectangle is delta
x times f of x one star, the area of the second rectangle is delta x times f of x two star.
And the area of rectangle number i is going to be its base delta x times its height, f
of x i star, and so on, if there are n rectangles, than the last rectangle will have base delta
x and height f of x and star. So the approximate area under the curve is given by adding up
all these areas of all these rectangles. In sigma notation, this can be written as sigma,
the psalm from i equals one to n, the number of rectangles of the area of the rectangle,
delta x times f of x i star. The exact area is then given by the limit of these approximating
areas, as the number of rectangles goes to infinity. That's the limit as n goes to infinity
of this  Riemann sum This video introduces the idea of finding
the area between two curves. Let's start with some review. in calculus one, you approximate
the area between a curve and the x axis by dividing it up into tall skinny rectangles.
You represented the width of one of these rectangles using the symbols delta x, here
delta x means a small distance along the x axis or a small change in x values. You picked
out an x value called a sample point from each of these little sub intervals along the
x axis, one sample point for each rectangle. The sample point on the x axis for rectangle
number i is denoted by x i star. You use the sample points and the function f to figure
out the height of each rectangle. The height of rectangle number i is given by the functions
value on the sample point f of x star. From this, you calculate the area of each rectangle,
the area of a rectangle is base times height. So the area of the first rectangle is delta
x times f of x one star, the area of the second rectangle is delta x times f of x two star.
And the area of rectangle number i is going to be its base delta x times its height, f
of x i star, and so on, if there are n rectangles, than the last rectangle will have base delta
x and height f of x and star. So the approximate area under the curve is given by adding up
all these areas of all these rectangles. In sigma notation, this can be written as sigma,
the psalm from i equals one to n, the number of rectangles of the area of the rectangle,
delta x times f of x i star. The exact area is then given by the limit of these approximating
areas, as the number of rectangles goes to infinity. That's the limit as n goes to infinity
of this Riemann sum of areas. of areas. A limit of a Riemann sum like this is by definition,
an integral. So we can rewrite this using the integral sign as the integral of f of
x dx. And the bounds of integration here, based on our picture are from x equals a 2x
equals b. Notice that when we convert the limit of a Riemann sum to integral notation,
the sample points x vystar just become our variable x, and the delta x becomes our dx.
Now that we've reviewed these ideas of calculating the area under a curve, we're going to use
these same ideas to calculate the area between two curves. To compute the area between two
curves, y equals f of x and y equals g of x, in between the x values of a and b, we
can again divide up the region and a tall skinny rectangles as shown in this picture.
Once again, let's let delta x be the width of each rectangle. And let's let x i star
represent a sample point in the ife interval. So x sub i star is a point on the x axis that
lives in the rectangle number i. Now if we want to compute the area of one of these tall
skinny rectangles, as always, the area of a rectangle is the base times the height.
The base of any of these rectangles is given by delta x. But the height is different for
each rectangle. If I focus on in on rectangle number, I assume this is rectangle number
i right here. It stretches all the way up to F of the sample point f of x by star and
it stretches all the way down. To add g of that x, y star. So the height of that rectangle
is the gap between f of x and g of x at that sample point. In other words, it's the difference,
f of x sub i star minus g of x, y star. Now that we have an expression for the area of
one of these rectangles, we can add up all those areas as before, to get an expression
for the approximate area between the curves, it's just the sum of these areas. And as before,
we can get the exact area. By making these rectangles skinnier and skinnier. By taking
more of them, we take the limit as the number of rectangles goes to infinity of this Riemann
sum. And as always, the limit of a Riemann sum is given by the integral where the exabyte
stars a sample points just become our variable x, and the delta x becomes our dx, let's put
in our bounds of integration, we're told that x goes between A and B, and we have an expression
for the area between our two curves. Actually, this formula only works if f of x is greater
than or equal to g of x on the interval from a to b. That inequality guarantees that this
expression, f of x i star minus g of x i star will be a positive number, we want a positive
height for our rectangle, so that will get a positive area. If instead, f of x is less
than or equal to g of x, then you'll need to switch around your subtraction and take
the integral of g of x minus f of x dx instead, in order to get a positive area. One way to
remember what to do is just to write the integral as the integral from a to b of the top y value
minus the bottom y value, dx. Remembering that you'll need to replace the top y value
and the bottom y value with functions of x before you can integrate. A limit of a Riemann sum like this is by definition,
an integral. So we can rewrite this using the integral sign as the integral of f of
x dx. And the bounds of integration here, based on our picture are from x equals a 2x
equals b. Notice that when we convert the limit of a Riemann sum to integral notation,
the sample points x vystar just become our variable x, and the delta x becomes our dx.
Now that we've reviewed these ideas of calculating the area under a curve, we're going to use
these same ideas to calculate the area between two curves. To compute the area between two
curves, y equals f of x and y equals g of x, in between the x values of a and b, we
can again divide up the region and a tall skinny rectangles as shown in this picture.
Once again, let's let delta x be the width of each rectangle. And let's let x i star
represent a sample point in the ife interval. So x sub i star is a point on the x axis that
lives in the rectangle number i. Now if we want to compute the area of one of these tall
skinny rectangles, as always, the area of a rectangle is the base times the height.
The base of any of these rectangles is given by delta x. But the height is different for
each rectangle. If I focus on in on rectangle number, I assume this is rectangle number
i right here. It stretches all the way up to F of the sample point f of x by star and
it stretches all the way down. To add g of that x, y star. So the height of that rectangle
is the gap between f of x and g of x at that sample point. In other words, it's the difference,
f of x sub i star minus g of x, y star. Now that we have an expression for the area of
one of these rectangles, we can add up all those areas as before, to get an expression
for the approximate area between the curves, it's just the sum of these areas. And as before,
we can get the exact area. By making these rectangles skinnier and skinnier. By taking
more of them, we take the limit as the number of rectangles goes to infinity of this Riemann
sum. And as always, the limit of a Riemann sum is given by the integral where the exabyte
stars a sample points just become our variable x, and the delta x becomes our dx, let's put
in our bounds of integration, we're told that x goes between A and B, and we have an expression
for the area between our two curves. Actually, this formula only works if f of x is greater
than or equal to g of x on the interval from a to b. That inequality guarantees that this
expression, f of x i star minus g of x i star will be a positive number, we want a positive
height for our rectangle, so that will get a positive area. If instead, f of x is less
than or equal to g of x, then you'll need to switch around your subtraction and take
the integral of g of x minus f of x dx instead, in order to get a positive area. One way to
remember what to do is just to write the integral as the integral from a to b of the top y value
minus the bottom y value, dx. Remembering that you'll need to replace the top y value
and the bottom y value with functions of x before you can integrate. Let's look at an example. We want to find
the area between the curve y equals x squared plus x and y equals three minus x squared.
x squared plus x is a parabola pointing upwards. So that must be the red curve here, while
three minus x squared is a parabola pointing downwards. So that must be this blue curve.
We know that area is given by the integral from our starting x value to our ending x
value of our top y values minus our bottom y values, all integrated with respect to x,
our top y values are given by the equation three minus x squared, and our bottom y values
are given by the equation x squared plus x. Now we still need to figure out the values
of a and b, the bounds of integration. And from the graph, it looks like a should be
maybe about negative one and a half, and B should be about one, since that's where the
green area starts and ends in the horizontal direction. But to find exact values of a and
b, the easiest thing to do is to set these two equations equal to each other and solve
for x. So I'll set three minus x squared equal to x squared plus x, I can add x squared to
both sides to get to x squared plus x minus three equals zero. This factors into 2x plus
three, and x minus one, and therefore x has to equal negative three halves and or x equals
one, just like we thought from the graph. So we can finish doing our setup, our bounds
of integration are from negative three halves to one, and I can simplify my integrand here.
This is three minus x squared minus x squared minus x. Or in other words, the integral from
negative three halves to one of minus 2x squared minus x plus three dx. This integrates to
minus 2x cubed over three my minus x squared over two plus 3x, evaluated between one and
negative three halves. Now I just need to plug in my bounds of integration and then
simplify to get 125 20 fourths as the area. Let's look at an example. We want to find
the area between the curve y equals x squared plus x and y equals three minus x squared.
x squared plus x is a parabola pointing upwards. So that must be the red curve here, while
three minus x squared is a parabola pointing downwards. So that must be this blue curve.
We know that area is given by the integral from our starting x value to our ending x
value of our top y values minus our bottom y values, all integrated with respect to x,
our top y values are given by the equation three minus x squared, and our bottom y values
are given by the equation x squared plus x. Now we still need to figure out the values
of a and b, the bounds of integration. And from the graph, it looks like a should be
maybe about negative one and a half, and B should be about one, since that's where the
green area starts and ends in the horizontal direction. But to find exact values of a and
b, the easiest thing to do is to set these two equations equal to each other and solve
for x. So I'll set three minus x squared equal to x squared plus x, I can add x squared to
both sides to get to x squared plus x minus three equals zero. This factors into 2x plus
three, and x minus one, and therefore x has to equal negative three halves and or x equals
one, just like we thought from the graph. So we can finish doing our setup, our bounds
of integration are from negative three halves to one, and I can simplify my integrand here.
This is three minus x squared minus x squared minus x. Or in other words, the integral from
negative three halves to one of minus 2x squared minus x plus three dx. This integrates to
minus 2x cubed over three my minus x squared over two plus 3x, evaluated between one and
negative three halves. Now I just need to plug in my bounds of integration and then
simplify to get 125 20 fourths as the area. In this video, we saw that the area between
two curves in between the x values of a and b can be given by the integral from a to b
have the top y values minus the bottom y values. dx, were the top y values and bottom y values
are functions of x. More specifically, if the top curve is given by y equals f of x,
and the bottom curve is y equals g of x, then this integral is the integral from a to b
of f of x minus g of x, dx. In this video, we'll calculate the volumes of solids of revolution.
A solid of revolution is a three dimensional object that can be formed by rotating a region
of the plane around an axis. volumes formed by rotating a region of the plane around a
line are called solids of revolution. In this figure on the left, this three dimensional
object is formed by rotating a region of the plane shaped like this, around the x axis,
the solid on the right can be formed by rotating a crescent shaped region of the plane like
this, again, around the x axis. If we slice these two solids of revolution, using planes
perpendicular to the x axis, on the left side, our cross sections look like disks. In this video, we saw that the area between
two curves in between the x values of a and b can be given by the integral from a to b
have the top y values minus the bottom y values. dx, were the top y values and bottom y values
are functions of x. More specifically, if the top curve is given by y equals f of x,
and the bottom curve is y equals g of x, then this integral is the integral from a to b
of f of x minus g of x, dx. In this video, we'll calculate the volumes of solids of revolution.
A solid of revolution is a three dimensional object that can be formed by rotating a region
of the plane around an axis. volumes formed by rotating a region of the plane around a
line are called solids of revolution. In this figure on the left, this three dimensional
object is formed by rotating a region of the plane shaped like this, around the x axis,
the solid on the right can be formed by rotating a crescent shaped region of the plane like
this, again, around the x axis. If we slice these two solids of revolution, using planes
perpendicular to the x axis, on the left side, our cross sections look like disks. A disc here means the inside of a circle.
The figure on the right is different because it's hollow inside. And when we slice it by
planes perpendicular to the x axis, we get cross sections that are shaped like washers.
A washer here means the region in between two concentric circles. So for solids of revolution,
the cross sections can have the shape of a disk, or the shape of a washer. The area of
a disk is given by the familiar formula, pi r squared, where r is the radius. And the
area of a washer can be written as pi times r outer squared minus pi times our inner squared,
where our outer is the radius of the big circle, and our inner is the radius of the little
circle. This formula works because the area of the washer is just the area of the larger
circle minus the area of the inside smaller circle. Now we know that the volume of any
solid that can be sliced into cross sections using planes perpendicular to the x axis is
given by v is the integral from x equals a to x equals B of the area of the cross section
at point x, integrated dx. If our cross sections are disks, this formula becomes the integral
of pi r squared dx, where the radius R is a function of x. If instead, the cross sections
look like washers, then the volume formula becomes the integral of pi r outer squared
minus pi r inner squared dx. Again, our outer and our inner are functions of x here. These
formulas work when they solid a revolution is formed by rotating a region around the
x axis or any horizontal line. When we rotate around a horizontal line, then our cross sectional
discs or washers are perpendicular to the x axis and are thin in the x direction. So
it makes sense to integrate dx. If instead, we want to rotate around the y axis or a vertical
line, then our disk or wash our cross sections are going to be perpendicular to the y axis
and are going to be thin in the y direction. So when rotating around the y axis or a vertical
line, we'll need to do our integral with respect to y. Our cross sectional area will be a function
of y will integrate d y and our bounds of integration will have to be Y values, our
formulas will look pretty much the same. We'll just have to calculate our Radia and bounds
of integration in terms of y instead of x. As our first example, let's consider the region
bounded by the curve y equals a cube root of x, the x axis and the line x equals eight.
We want to find the volume of the solid of revolution found by rotating this region around
the x axis. or cross sections here are going to be discs. And these discs are thin in the
extraction. So we're going to be integrating dx, our smallest x value is zero, and our
largest is eight. So those are our bounds of integration. And we want to integrate pi
times the radius squared dx. Now the radius of our disks is given by the y coordinate
on this curve. So we can write r is equal to y, which is equal to the cube root of x
according to our equation. So we can rewrite the volume as the integral from zero to eight
of pi times the cube root of x squared dx, I can pull out the PI and rewrite this integral
using exponents and integrate and then evaluate using bounds of integration to get three fifths
pi times eight to the five thirds minus zero. Now, eight to the five thirds means eight
to the 1/3 raised to the fifth power, eight to the 1/3 is two and two to the fifth is
32. So this expression simplifies to three fifths pi times 32, or 96/5 A disc here means the inside of a circle.
The figure on the right is different because it's hollow inside. And when we slice it by
planes perpendicular to the x axis, we get cross sections that are shaped like washers.
A washer here means the region in between two concentric circles. So for solids of revolution,
the cross sections can have the shape of a disk, or the shape of a washer. The area of
a disk is given by the familiar formula, pi r squared, where r is the radius. And the
area of a washer can be written as pi times r outer squared minus pi times our inner squared,
where our outer is the radius of the big circle, and our inner is the radius of the little
circle. This formula works because the area of the washer is just the area of the larger
circle minus the area of the inside smaller circle. Now we know that the volume of any
solid that can be sliced into cross sections using planes perpendicular to the x axis is
given by v is the integral from x equals a to x equals B of the area of the cross section
at point x, integrated dx. If our cross sections are disks, this formula becomes the integral
of pi r squared dx, where the radius R is a function of x. If instead, the cross sections
look like washers, then the volume formula becomes the integral of pi r outer squared
minus pi r inner squared dx. Again, our outer and our inner are functions of x here. These
formulas work when they solid a revolution is formed by rotating a region around the
x axis or any horizontal line. When we rotate around a horizontal line, then our cross sectional
discs or washers are perpendicular to the x axis and are thin in 
the x direction. So it makes sense to integrate dx. If instead, we want to rotate around the
y axis or a vertical line, then our disk or wash our cross sections are going to be perpendicular
to the y axis and are going to be thin in the y direction. So when rotating around the
y axis or a vertical line, we'll need to do our integral with respect to y. Our cross
sectional area will be a function of y will integrate d y and our bounds of integration
will have to be Y values, our formulas will look pretty much the same. We'll just have
to calculate our Radia and bounds of integration in terms of y instead of x. As our first example,
let's consider the region bounded by the curve y equals a cube root of x, the x axis and
the line x equals eight. We want to find the volume of the solid of revolution found by
rotating this region around the x axis. or cross sections here are going to be discs.
And these discs are thin in the extraction. So we're going to be integrating dx, our smallest
x value is zero, and our largest is eight. So those are our bounds of integration. And
we want to integrate pi times the radius squared dx. Now the radius of our disks is given by
the y coordinate on this curve. So we can write r is equal to y, which is equal to the
cube root of x according to our equation. So we can rewrite the volume as the integral
from zero to eight of pi times the cube root of x squared dx, I can pull out the PI and
rewrite this integral using exponents and integrate and then evaluate using bounds of
integration to get three fifths pi times eight to the five thirds minus zero. Now, eight
to the five thirds means eight to the 1/3 raised to the fifth power, eight to the 1/3
is two and two to the fifth is 32. So this expression simplifies to three fifths pi times
32, or 96/5 pie. pie. As our next example, let's consider the region
in the first quadrant bounded by two curves, the curve y equals the cube root of x and
y equals 1/4 times x. We'll start by rotating this region around the x axis to get this
sort of hollow base shape. Notice that our cross sections this time are shaped like washers,
where the outer circle of the washer is swept out by the curve y equals cube root of x,
and the inner circle is swept out by the curve y equals 1/4 X. We know our volume is given
by the integral of pi times our outer squared minus pi times our inner squared. And since
our washers are thin in the x direction, we know we'll need to integrate dx, our bounds
of integration are just our lowest x value of zero, and our largest x value, which is
where these two curves intersect, which is an x value of eight. We can confirm that the
two curves intersect when x equals eight by setting them equal to each other. And solving
for x, dividing both sides by x to the 1/3. And multiplying both sides by four gives us
four equals x to the two thirds. And raising both sides to the three halves power gives
us x equals four to three halves, or x equals eight. As our next example, let's consider the region
in the first quadrant bounded by two curves, the curve y equals the cube root of x and
y equals 1/4 times x. We'll start by rotating this region around the x axis to get this
sort of hollow base shape. Notice that our cross sections this time are shaped like washers,
where the outer circle of the washer is swept out by the curve y equals cube root of x,
and the inner circle is swept out by the curve y equals 1/4 X. We know our volume is given
by the integral of pi times our outer squared minus pi times our inner squared. And since
our washers are thin in the x direction, we know we'll need to integrate dx, our bounds
of integration are just our lowest x value of zero, and our largest x value, which is
where these two curves intersect, which is an x value of eight. We can confirm that the
two curves intersect when x equals eight by setting them equal to each other. And solving
for x, dividing both sides by x to the 1/3. And multiplying both sides by four gives us
four equals x to the two thirds. And raising both sides to the three halves power gives
us x equals four to three halves, or x equals eight. This confirms we have the correct bound of
integration here. Now we need to figure out a formula for the outer radius as a function
of x and a formula for the inner radius. Also, This confirms we have the correct bound of
integration here. Now we need to figure out a formula for the outer radius as a function
of x and a formula for the inner radius. Also, since the outer circle is swept out by the
curve y equals cube root of x, the outer radius is just given by the y coordinate of this
curve as a function of x, that's the cube root of x. Now the inner radius is given by
the y coordinate of this line, and the y coordinate of this line as a function of x is 1/4 x.
So we set up an equation for the volume of our solid and I routine computation gives
us a volume of 128 fifteenth's times pi. Now let's switch gears and rotate this region
around the y axis instead. Our cross sections are still washers, but this time the washers
are thin in the y direction. So we're going to be integrating with respect to y. Our bounds
of integration are also y values and start at the minimum y value of zero and the maximum
Y value of two, that corresponds to this intersection, where x equals eight, and y, which is the
cube root of x, or 1/4 times x is then equal to two. For this problem, we need our our
outer and our inner to the functions of y. From the picture, we see that our outer is
actually the x coordinate on this line. The line has the equation y equals 1/4 x. And
so x is equal to four y. So that gives us our outer as a function of y. defined our
inner, we can do the same sort of thing using the x coordinate of the curve, y equals cube
root of x. But writing that x coordinate in terms of y, we have y equals the cube root
of x means that x is equal to y cubed. And so our inner is equal to y cubed as a function
of y. putting this all together, we have an equation for volume. We can simplify this
and integrate to get an answer of 512 pi over 21. In this video, we calculated the volumes
of solids of revolution, using the disk and the washer methods, and the following formulas.
One way to calculate the volume of a loaf of bread is to slice it into slices, and calculate
the volume of each slice separately. That's the idea to keep in mind as we cover this
topic, on volumes using cross sections. A lot of three dimensional objects are kind
of like loaves of bread, and can be naturally sliced into slabs or slices like this. Let's
suppose we've sliced our object into n slabs, we'll call them s one s two through sn in
this picture, and is seven, here's s one, here's s two, here's s3, and so on, we'll
assume we've sliced in such a way that each slice is the same thickness, we'll call that
thickness delta x. Well, the volume of the solid is just the sum of the volumes of the
slices. And sigma notation, we can write this as the sum from i equals one to n, the number
of slabs volume of s by the I slab. Now the volume of the slab is approximately its cross
sectional area times its width. By cross sectional area of the slab, I mean the area of the front
or the back part of the slice, where you might spread peanut butter. Well, now, as you've
noticed from making peanut butter sandwiches, the area of the front of the slice might be
slightly different from the area of the back of the slice. So what we'll do is for each
interval, I, each slab will just pick a sample point x vystar, that's in that I've interval,
it could be on the left endpoint, or it could be on the right endpoint, or it could be in
the middle somewhere. And we'll just look at the cross sectional area, I'll call it
a at x, y star that represents the area if I were to go karate chop right at that x y
star and figure out the cross sectional area at that point. since the outer circle is swept out by the
curve y equals cube root of x, the outer radius is just given by the y coordinate of this
curve as a function of x, that's the cube root of x. Now the inner radius is given by
the y coordinate of this line, and the y coordinate of this line as a function of x is 1/4 x.
So we set up an equation for the volume of our solid and I routine computation gives
us a volume of 128 fifteenth's times pi. Now let's switch gears and rotate this region
around the y axis instead. Our cross sections are still washers, but this time the washers
are thin in the y direction. So we're going to be integrating with respect to y. Our bounds
of integration are also y values and start at the minimum y value of zero and the maximum
Y value of two, that corresponds to this intersection, where x equals eight, and y, which is the
cube root of x, or 1/4 times x is then equal to two. For this problem, we need our our
outer and our inner to the functions of y. From the picture, we see that our outer is
actually the x coordinate on this line. The line has the equation y equals 1/4 x. And
so x is equal to four y. So that gives us our outer as a function of y. defined our
inner, we can do the same sort of thing using the x coordinate of the curve, y equals cube
root of x. But writing that x coordinate in terms of y, we have y equals the cube root
of x means that x is equal to y cubed. And so our inner is equal to y cubed as a function
of y. putting this all together, we have an equation for volume. We can simplify this
and integrate to get an answer of 512 pi over 21. In this video, we calculated the volumes
of solids of revolution, using the disk and the washer methods, and the following formulas.
One way to calculate the volume of a loaf of bread is to slice it into slices, and calculate
the volume of each slice separately. That's the idea to keep in mind as we cover this
topic, on volumes using cross sections. A lot of three dimensional objects are kind
of like loaves of bread, and can be naturally sliced into slabs or slices like this. Let's
suppose we've sliced our object into n slabs, we'll call them s one s two through sn in
this picture, and is seven, here's s one, here's s two, here's s3, and so on, we'll
assume we've sliced in such a way that each slice is the same thickness, we'll call that
thickness delta x. Well, the volume of the solid is just the sum of the volumes of the
slices. And sigma notation, we can write this as the sum from i equals one to n, the number
of slabs volume of s by the I slab. Now the volume of the slab is approximately its cross
sectional area times its width. By cross sectional area of the slab, I mean the area of the front
or the back part of the slice, where you might spread peanut butter. Well, now, as you've
noticed from making peanut butter sandwiches, the area of the front of the slice might be
slightly different from the area of the back of the slice. So what we'll do is for each
interval, I, each slab will just pick a sample point x vystar, that's in that I've interval,
it could be on the left endpoint, or it could be on the right endpoint, or it could be in
the middle somewhere. And we'll just look at the cross sectional area, I'll call it
a at x, y star that represents the area if I were to go karate chop right at that x y
star and figure out the cross sectional area at that point. Now we can go back and write our volume as
the cross sectional area at x star times delta x the thickness of the slice. Now this is
just an approximation of volume, because this expression here gives you the volume as if
the slices are very regular, and have the same area from one side to the other. But
it's a good approximation if the slices are thin. And in fact, we can calculate the exact
volume by taking the limit as the slices get thinner and thinner. Or in other words, as
the number of slices goes to infinity. What we have here is the limit of a Riemann sum.
And therefore, we can rewrite it as an integral where the x i star becomes our variable x
and the delta x becomes r dx. For the bounds of integration, we'll just use the abstract
x values of a and b for a real problem. We would fill these in based on In the context
of the problem, this gives us an abstract expression for the volume of a three dimensional
object. But in practice, in order to compute volumes like this, we'll first need a formula
for a of x, the cross sectional area as a function of x. As an example, let's try to
find the volume of a solid whose base is an ellipse given by this equation, and whose
cross sections perpendicular to the x axis are squares. First, let me graph the base,
it looks like an ellipse that's thinner in the extraction than in the y direction. So
something like this. Now sitting above this base, are a bunch of squares. And the squares
are oriented in such a way that they're perpendicular to the x axis. So they're oriented sort of
like this, I'll try to draw a square here, that's supposed to be coming out of the picture
here. And here's another square, again, coming out of the picture. Here's a slightly better
picture that I drew using Mathematica. It's tilted. So we're looking at it from below,
where you can see the ellipse here. And you can see the square cross sections, the x axis
is going in this direction, that's x and the y axis is in that direction. This picture
is actually an approximation of the solid, where they're only about eight or 10 slices,
each one's kind of sick and has the same area on the front and the back. better picture
of the solid is this one. Here, the slices are infinitely thin, but they're still square
shaped. And they're still oriented in such a way that they're perpendicular to the x
axis. Now we know that volume is given by the integral from a to b of area as a function
of x dx. On our lips, the minimum x value is negative two, and the maximum x value is
two. So I can write those in for my bounds of integration. Also, I know that the area
of a square is just the side length squared. So I can write my cross sectional area as
s of x squared, where s of x is the side length of the square as a function of x. Notice that
for different x values, my side lengths are different. But my side length is always twice
the y value twice the distance from the x axis to the y value on the ellipse. So I'll
rewrite my formula as two times y as a function of x squared. I can simplify this a little
bit as the integral of four times y of x squared, dx. Now all I need to do is find a formula
for y as a function of x. And since I've got this equation up here, relating y and x, all
I have to do is solve for y in terms of x. In fact, I can get by solving for y squared,
since I've really got y squared in my formula. solving for y squared, I have y squared over
nine is equal to one minus x squared over four, which means that y squared is equal
to nine times one minus x squared Now we can go back and write our volume as
the cross sectional area at x star times delta x the thickness of the slice. Now this is
just an approximation of volume, because this expression here gives you the volume as if
the slices are very regular, and have the same area from one side to the other. But
it's a good approximation if the slices are thin. And in fact, we can calculate the exact
volume by taking the limit as the slices get thinner and thinner. Or in other words, as
the number of slices goes to infinity. What we have here is the limit of a Riemann sum.
And therefore, we can rewrite it as an integral where the x i star becomes our variable x
and the delta x becomes r dx. For the bounds of integration, we'll just use the abstract
x values of a and b for a real problem. We would fill these in based on In the context
of the problem, this gives us an abstract expression for the volume of a three dimensional
object. But in practice, in order to compute volumes like this, we'll first need a formula
for a of x, the cross sectional area as a function of x. As an example, let's try to
find the volume of a solid whose base is an ellipse given by this equation, and whose
cross sections perpendicular to the x axis are squares. First, let me graph the base,
it looks like an ellipse that's thinner in the extraction than in the y direction. So
something like this. Now sitting above this base, are a bunch of squares. And the squares
are oriented in such a way that they're perpendicular to the x axis. So they're oriented sort of
like this, I'll try to draw a square here, that's supposed to be coming out of the picture
here. And here's another square, again, coming out of the picture. Here's a slightly better
picture that I drew using Mathematica. It's tilted. So we're looking at it from below,
where you can see the ellipse here. And you can see the square cross sections, the x axis
is going in this direction, that's x and the y axis is in that direction. This picture
is actually an approximation of the solid, where they're only about eight or 10 slices,
each one's kind of sick and has the same area on the front and the back. better picture
of the solid is this one. Here, the slices are infinitely thin, but they're still square
shaped. And they're still oriented in such a way that they're perpendicular to the x
axis. Now we know that volume is given by the integral from a to b of area as a function
of x dx. On our lips, the minimum x value is negative two, and the maximum x value is
two. So I can write those in for my bounds of integration. Also, I know that the area
of a square is just the side length squared. So I can write my cross sectional area as
s of x squared, where s of x is the side length of the square as a function of x. Notice that
for different x values, my side lengths are different. But my side length is always twice
the y value twice the distance from the x axis to the y value on the ellipse. So I'll
rewrite my formula as two times y as a function of x squared. I can simplify this a little
bit as the integral of four times y of x squared, dx. Now all I need to do is find a formula
for y as a function of x. And since I've got this equation up here, relating y and x, all
I have to do is solve for y in terms of x. In fact, I can get by solving for y squared,
since I've really got y squared in my formula. solving for y squared, I have y squared over
nine is equal to one minus x squared over four, which means that y squared is equal
to nine times one minus x squared over four. over four. Now I plug this into my volume equation. And
I get the integral from negative two to four times nine, one minus x squared over four
dx. I'll pull out the four times nine that's 36. and integrate. Plugging in values and
simplifying, we get a final answer of 96. Now, how would this problem be different if
we used cross sections that were perpendicular to the y axis instead of the x axis? Well,
for one thing, our picture would look a little bit different. Since our squares would now
be running in the other direction. Since our squares are now fin in the y direction, instead
of the extraction, it makes sense to have the width of a slab B delta y, and to compute
our volume as an integral with respect to y. Our bounds of integration now and they
also need to be Y values. So they run from the minimum y value of negative three to the
maximum y value of three. And our cross sectional area should also be written in terms of y.
area is still side length squared. But now our side length is actually twice our x value,
instead of twice our y value. And we can write our x value squared in terms of our y value
as four times one minus y squared over nine. Therefore, our area, which is our side length
squared, which is 2x, quantity squared, or 4x squared, is going to be equal to 16 times
one minus y squared over nine, we'll need to calculate our volume by taking the integral
from negative three to three of 16 times one minus y squared over nine d y. If we integrate
this, we get an answer of 64. a different answer from the answer to our first problem,
and it makes sense that we get a different answer, because we now have a different three
dimensional object with a different shape and a different volume. In this video, we
saw that if we divided three dimensional objects into slices, then the volume of the three
dimensional object is the integral of the cross sectional area, dx. In this video, I'll
derive a formula to calculate the length of a curve given as a function y equals f of
x. For a curve like this one that's made up of a bunch of straight line segments, it's
easy to calculate the length just by using the distance formula to find the length of
each line segment. The distance formula says the distance between two points x one, y one,
and x two, y two is given by the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus
y one squared. Applying this formula to the first line segment, connecting the points
one, two, and two, three, we get a length of the square root of two minus one squared
plus three minus two squared, which is the square root of two, the length of the next
line segment can be calculated similarly, and the next piece has length two, we don't
even need the distance formula for that one. And the last line segment has a length of
the square to five. If we add up all the lengths of these four line segments, we get a total
length of the curve of two times the square root of five, plus the square root of two
plus two, Now I plug this into my volume equation. And
I get the integral from negative two to four times nine, one minus x squared over four
dx. I'll pull out the four times nine that's 36. and integrate. Plugging in values and
simplifying, we get a final answer of 96. Now, how would this problem be different if
we used cross sections that were perpendicular to the y axis instead of the x axis? Well,
for one thing, our picture would look a little bit different. Since our squares would now
be running in the other direction. Since our squares are now fin in the y direction, instead
of the extraction, it makes sense to have the width of a slab B delta y, and to compute
our volume as an integral with respect to y. Our bounds of integration now and they
also need to be Y values. So they run from the minimum y value of negative three to the
maximum y value of three. And our cross sectional area should also be written in terms of y.
area is still side length squared. But now our side length is actually twice our x value,
instead of twice our y value. And we can write our x value squared in terms of our y value
as four times one minus y squared over nine. Therefore, our area, which is our side length
squared, which is 2x, quantity squared, or 4x squared, is going to be equal to 16 times
one minus y squared over nine, we'll need to calculate our volume by taking the integral
from negative three to three of 16 times one minus y squared over nine d y. If we integrate
this, we get an answer of 64. a different answer from the answer to our first problem,
and it makes sense that we get a different answer, because we now have a different three
dimensional object with a different shape and a different volume. In this video, we
saw that if we divided three dimensional objects into slices, then the volume of the three
dimensional object is the integral of the cross sectional area, dx. In this video, I'll
derive a formula to calculate the length of a curve given as a function y equals f of
x. For a curve like this one that's made up of a bunch of straight line segments, it's
easy to calculate the length just by using the distance formula to find the length of
each line segment. The distance formula says the distance between two points x one, y one,
and x two, y two is given by the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus
y one squared. Applying this formula to the first line segment, connecting the points
one, two, and two, three, we get a length of the square root of two minus one squared
plus three minus two squared, which is the square root of two, the length of the next
line segment can be calculated similarly, and the next piece has length two, we don't
even need the distance formula for that one. And the last line segment has a length of
the square to five. If we add up all the lengths of these four line segments, we get a total
length of the curve of two times the square root of five, plus the square root of two
plus two, we can use the same process to approximate
the length of any curve by dividing it up into n small pieces, and approximate the length
of one small curved piece with a straight line segment. And using the distance formula
to calculate the length of these line segments, in this picture, the curve is divided up into
nine sub intervals. I'll label the corresponding points on the x axis, x zero for a x 1x, two,
all the way through x eight and x nine is B. And I can label the points on my curve.
So here's the sixth point P six has x coordinates xx, and then y coordinate will be f of x x,
since my curve is given by the equation y equals f of x. More generally, I have N sub
intervals. And I'll label an arbitrary point piece of I. The point before it is then a
piece of i minus one. And the length of the ice segment is given by the distance between
P sub i and P sub i minus one. So that's the square root of x sub i minus x sub i minus
one squared plus f of x sub i minus f of x sub i minus one squared by the distance formula.
The total length of the curve can be approximated by adding the lengths of all these line segments
up. So that's the sum from i equals one to N for the N line segments of these lengths.
This is starting to look a little bit like a Riemann sum because of the Sigma sign, but
it's missing the delta x That I usually have out here. So I'm going to use a trick, I'm
going to multiply each term of this expression by x sub i minus x sub i minus one divided
by x sub i minus x sub i minus one. This doesn't change the value of my expression, but it
does introduce a delta x over delta x into my equation, because delta x represents the
width of a sub interval. And that's equal to x by minus x, y minus one, I'm going to
suck the factor in the denominator inside the square root sign, notice I have to square
it, when I pull it inside the square root sign. Now I'm going to rewrite my fraction
inside the square root sign. Now this first fraction is just one, and the second fraction
can be rewritten with a single squared sign. And the second expression should look familiar
to you. It's the expression for the slope of a secant line. At effects, I n x i minus
one are very close to each other, the slope of that secant line is very close to the slope
of a tangent line for at a point in that interval. In fact, you might recall that the mean value
theorem says that the slope of the secant line is actually exactly equal to the slope
of a tangent line. For some point, I'll call it x i star in that interval. So I'll rewrite
my expression for the approximate length of the curve. And since x i minus x i minus one
can be written as delta x, I have a Riemann sum here. So if I want to find the exact arc
length, I just need to take the limit of this Riemann sum. This is the limit as the number
of intervals goes to infinity. We know that the limit of a Riemann sum is given by an
integral. So the arc length is given by the integral of the square root of one plus f
prime of x squared dx, starting from the first x value of A to the last x value of b. And
so we've derived a formula for arc length. Sometimes, this formula is also written with
the alternative notation of dydx, instead of f prime of x. Let's use the arc length
formula to find the length of the curve y equals x to the three halves between x equals
one and x equals four. That's this section of the curve drawn. we can use the same process to approximate
the length of any curve by dividing it up into n small pieces, and approximate the length
of one small curved piece with a straight line segment. And using the distance formula
to calculate the length of these line segments, in this picture, the curve is divided up into
nine sub intervals. I'll label the corresponding points on the x axis, x zero for a x 1x, two,
all the way through x eight and x nine is B. And I can label the points on my curve.
So here's the sixth point P six has x coordinates xx, and then y coordinate will be f of x x,
since my curve is given by the equation y equals f of x. More generally, I have N sub
intervals. And I'll label an arbitrary point piece of I. The point before it is then a
piece of i minus one. And the length of the ice segment is given by the distance between
P sub i and P sub i minus one. So that's the square root of x sub i minus x sub i minus
one squared plus f of x sub i minus f of x sub i minus one squared by the distance formula.
The total length of the curve can be approximated by adding the lengths of all these line segments
up. So that's the sum from i equals one to N for the N line segments of these lengths.
This is starting to look a little bit like a Riemann sum because of the Sigma sign, but
it's missing the delta x That I usually have out here. So I'm going to use a trick, I'm
going to multiply each term of this expression by x sub i minus x sub i minus one divided
by x sub i minus x sub i minus one. This doesn't change the value of my expression, but it
does introduce a delta x over delta x into my equation, because delta x represents the
width of a sub interval. And that's equal to x by minus x, y minus one, I'm going to
suck the factor in the denominator inside the square root sign, notice I have to square
it, when I pull it inside the square root sign. Now I'm going to rewrite my fraction
inside the square root sign. Now this first fraction is just one, and the second fraction
can be rewritten with a single squared sign. And the second expression should look familiar
to you. It's the expression for the slope of a secant line. At effects, I n x i minus
one are very close to each other, the slope of that secant line is very close to the slope
of a tangent line for at a point in that interval. In fact, you might recall that the mean value
theorem says that the slope of the secant line is actually exactly equal to the slope
of a tangent line. For some point, I'll call it x i star in that interval. So I'll rewrite
my expression for the approximate length of the curve. And since x i minus x i minus one
can be written as delta x, I have a Riemann sum here. So if I want to find the exact arc
length, I just need to take the limit of this Riemann sum. This is the limit as the number
of intervals goes to infinity. We know that the limit of a Riemann sum is given by an
integral. So the arc length is given by the integral of the square root of one plus f
prime of x squared dx, starting from the first x value of A to the last x value of b. And
so we've derived a formula for arc length. Sometimes, this formula is also written with
the alternative notation of dydx, instead of f prime of x. Let's use the arc length
formula to find the length of the curve y equals x to the three halves between x equals
one and x equals four. That's this section of the curve drawn. Here's the general formula for arc length.
And since dydx, for our curve is three halves x to the one half, we get that arc length
is the integral from one to four of the square root of one plus three halves x to the one
half squared dx. After simplifying a little bit, we can use use substitution to rewrite
this. So we get the integral from 13 fourths, to 10 of the square root of u times four ninths
do which integrates to u to the three halves divided by three halves, times four ninths,
evaluated between 10 and 13 fourths, which after some computation works out to 1/27 times
at the square root of 10 minus 13, the squared of 13 or approximately 7.6 units, which seems
about right, based on the graph, taking into account the fact that this scale here is by
twos on the y axis. In this video, we found the formula for the arc length of a curve.
If the curve stretches from x equals a to x equals b, then the arc length is given by
the integral from a to b of the square root of one plus f prime of x squared dx. This
video introduces the idea of work from physics and the key role of integration in doing work
calculations. If a constant force f is applied to move an object a distance d, then the work
done to move the object is defined to be work equals force times distance, or in symbols,
w equals F times d. The units of force can be given in metric units, or in bold fashion,
English units. Since force is mass times acceleration, the units of force are going to be units of
mass, which are kilograms, times units of acceleration, meters per second squared. This
collection of units is also called a Newton. In English units, force is given typically,
in terms of pounds. Now the units of work since work is force times distance, and distance
in metric units is in meters. That gives units for work of kilograms meters squared per second
squared, or we can write it work as Newton meters. And these collection of units is also
given its own name, which is the joule. If we're using English units for work, work again
is force times distance. So the units become pounds times feet are usually this is written
instead, as a foot pound. Now, if I give you my weight in pounds, I weigh about 140 pounds.
Those pounds are already and I get it a force. So that 140 pounds, my weight is also telling
the force of gravity on my body. But if I tell you instead, that my mass is 63.5 kilograms,
well, that's a unit of mass not a unit of force. So if I want to know the force, due
to gravity on my body, I'm gonna have to multiply that 63.5 by the acceleration due to gravity,
which is 9.8 meters per second squared. That product works out to be 622.3 kilogram meters
per second squared. Notice that we're now have the right units for force, we could also
say, that's the force of gravity on my body is 622.3 Newtons. Here's the general formula for arc length.
And since dydx, for our curve is three halves x to the one half, we get that arc length
is the integral from one to four of the square root of one plus three halves x to the one
half squared dx. After simplifying a little bit, we can use use substitution to rewrite
this. So we get the integral from 13 fourths, to 10 of the square root of u times four ninths
do which integrates to u to the three halves divided by three halves, times four ninths,
evaluated between 10 and 13 fourths, which after some computation works out to 1/27 times
at the square root of 10 minus 13, the squared of 13 or approximately 7.6 units, which seems
about right, based on the graph, taking into account the fact that this scale here is by
twos on the y axis. In this video, we found the formula for the arc length of a curve.
If the curve stretches from x equals a to x equals b, then the arc length is given by
the integral from a to b of the square root of one plus f prime of x squared dx. This
video introduces the idea of work from physics and the key role of integration in doing work
calculations. If a constant force f is applied to move an object a distance d, then the work
done to move the object is defined to be work equals force times distance, or in symbols,
w equals F times d. The units of force can be given in metric units, or in bold fashion,
English units. Since force is mass times acceleration, the units of force are going to be units of
mass, which are kilograms, times units of acceleration, meters per second squared. This
collection of units is also called a Newton. In English units, force is given typically,
in terms of pounds. Now the units of work since work is force times distance, and distance
in metric units is in meters. That gives units for work of kilograms meters squared per second
squared, or we can write it work as Newton meters. And these collection of units is also
given its own name, which is the joule. If we're using English units for work, work again
is force times distance. So the units become pounds times feet are usually this is written
instead, as a foot pound. Now, if I give you my weight in pounds, I weigh about 140 pounds.
Those pounds are already and I get it a force. So that 140 pounds, my weight is also telling
the force of gravity on my body. But if I tell you instead, that my mass is 63.5 kilograms,
well, that's a unit of mass not a unit of force. So if I want to know the force, due
to gravity on my body, I'm gonna have to multiply that 63.5 by the acceleration due to gravity,
which is 9.8 meters per second squared. That product works out to be 622.3 kilogram meters
per second squared. Notice that we're now have the right units for force, we could also
say, that's the force of gravity on my body is 622.3 Newtons. Now that we familiarize ourselves with units
a bit, let's do some examples. As our first example, how much work is done to lift a two
pound book off the floor onto a shelf that's five feet high? Well, we know that work is
force times distance, and two pounds is already a unit of force. And distance is five feet.
So the work done is 10 foot pounds. Now let's do the same problem in metric units. The two
pound book is actually a naught point nine kilogram book, and we're lifting it off the
floor onto a shelf that's about 1.5 meters high. Well, work is still force times distance.
But now the force is point nine kilograms times the acceleration due to gravity 9.8
meters per second squared, times our distance of 1.5 meters. That gives us a product of
13.23 kilograms meters squared per second squared, or in other words, 13.23 jewels.
In the previous two examples, force was constant, so we could just multiply force by distance
to get work. Now let's consider the case where force is not constant. Let's say a particle
moves along the x axis from a point x equals a to a point x equals b. According to a force,
F of x, that's a function of x and varies with x. How much work is done in moving a
particle although the force is not constant, on the whole interval from a to b, if we divide
up that interval, into a bunch of little sub intervals, each of width delta x, then on
any particular sub interval The force is going to be approximately constant, it's not going
to change a whole lot on a tiny little sub interval. As usual, let's pick a sample point
exabyte star in the eye sub interval for each little sub interval. exabytes star could be
the left endpoint of the sub interval, the right endpoint or any point in the middle.
Now, on the AI sub interval, the force is approximately constant is approximately equal
to f at EXA biostar. Therefore, the work on that I sub interval is approximately equal
to this constant f x sub i star times the distance that the particle is going on that
sub interval, that that distance is just the length of the sub interval delta x. Instead
of thinking of the big picture of the particle going all the way from A to B, I'm thinking
of it going just along the first sub interval with the approximately constant force at a
distance of delta x. And then it's going to go the second sub interval, again, the forces
approximately constant times the distance of delta x. And then we'll do some more work
getting along the third sub interval, another proximately, constant force times delta x.
And so on each little tiny bit of the way, I'll get another little chunk of work. And
then I can get the entire amount of work by adding all those little chunks of work up.
So the total work done is going to be the sum from i equals one to n, where n is the
number of sub intervals of the work done on each sub interval, which is f of x sub i star
times distance delta x. I should say this is approximately the total work, in order
to get the actual total work, we'll need to take a limit as we use more and more skinnier
and skinnier subintervals. So the limit as n goes to infinity of this Riemann sum, the
limit of a Riemann sum is an integral. So we've got the integral of the force f of x,
dx, and we'll integrate between the minimum x value of a and the maximum x value of b.
And that's our formula for work. Now that we familiarize ourselves with units
a bit, let's do some examples. As our first example, how much work is done to lift a two
pound book off the floor onto a shelf that's five feet high? Well, we know that work is
force times distance, and two pounds is already a unit of force. And distance is five feet.
So the work done is 10 foot pounds. Now let's do the same problem in metric units. The two
pound book is actually a naught point nine kilogram book, and we're lifting it off the
floor onto a shelf that's about 1.5 meters high. Well, work is still force times distance.
But now the force is point nine kilograms times the acceleration due to gravity 9.8
meters per second squared, times our distance of 1.5 meters. That gives us a product of
13.23 kilograms meters squared per second squared, or in other words, 13.23 jewels.
In the previous two examples, force was constant, so we could just multiply force by distance
to get work. Now let's consider the case where force is not constant. Let's say a particle
moves along the x axis from a point x equals a to a point x equals b. According to a force,
F of x, that's a function of x and varies with x. How much work is done in moving a
particle although the force is not constant, on the whole interval from a to b, if we divide
up that interval, into a bunch of little sub intervals, each of width delta x, then on
any particular sub interval The force is going to be approximately constant, it's not going
to change a whole lot on a tiny little sub interval. As usual, let's pick a sample point
exabyte star in the eye sub interval for each little sub interval. exabytes star could be
the left endpoint of the sub interval, the right endpoint or any point in the middle.
Now, on the AI sub interval, the force is approximately constant is approximately equal
to f at EXA biostar. Therefore, the work on that I sub interval is approximately equal
to this constant f x sub i star times the distance that the particle is going on that
sub interval, that that distance is just the length of the sub interval delta x. Instead
of thinking of the big picture of the particle going all the way from A to B, I'm thinking
of it going just along the first sub interval with the approximately constant force at a
distance of delta x. And then it's going to go the second sub interval, again, the forces
approximately constant times the distance of delta x. And then we'll do some more work
getting along the third sub interval, another proximately, constant force times delta x.
And so on each little tiny bit of the way, I'll get another little chunk of work. And
then I can get the entire amount of work by adding all those little chunks of work up.
So the total work done is going to be the sum from i equals one to n, where n is the
number of sub intervals of the work done on each sub interval, which is f of x sub i star
times distance delta x. I should say this is approximately the total work, in order
to get the actual total work, we'll need to take a limit as we use more and more skinnier
and skinnier subintervals. So the limit as n goes to infinity of this Riemann sum, the
limit of a Riemann sum is an integral. So we've got the integral of the force f of x,
dx, and we'll integrate between the minimum x value of a and the maximum x value of b.
And that's our formula for work. Let's look at a physical example. How much
work is required to lift 1000 kilograms satellite from the Earth's surface to an altitude of
two times 10 to the six meters above the Earth's surface. We're given that the gravitational
force is F equals g times capital M times lowercase m divided by r squared, where m
is the mass of the Earth, lowercase m is the mass of the satellite, r is the distance between
the satellite and the center of the earth, and g is the gravitational constant. We're
also given numbers for the radius of the Earth, the mass of the Earth, and the gravitational
constant. This problem is different from the problem of lifting the calculus book. When
we lifted a book over just a few meters, the force of gravity was essentially constant
over such a small distance. So we could use the equation work equals force times distance.
But in this problem, since we're moving the satellite a larger distance, the force of
gravity changes with distance. And so we need to use work as the integral of this force
with respect to distance. The distance variable in this problem is R. So I'll rewrite this
using the equation for force and integrate with respect to Dr. Let's look at a physical example. How much
work is required to lift 1000 kilograms satellite from the Earth's surface to an altitude of
two times 10 to the six meters above the Earth's surface. We're given that the gravitational
force is F equals g times capital M times lowercase m divided by r squared, where m
is the mass of the Earth, lowercase m is the mass of the satellite, r is the distance between
the satellite and the center of the earth, and g is the gravitational constant. We're
also given numbers for the radius of the Earth, the mass of the Earth, and the gravitational
constant. This problem is different from the problem of lifting the calculus book. When
we lifted a book over just a few meters, the force of gravity was essentially constant
over such a small distance. So we could use the equation work equals force times distance.
But in this problem, since we're moving the satellite a larger distance, the force of
gravity changes with distance. And so we need to use work as the integral of this force
with respect to distance. The distance variable in this problem is R. So I'll rewrite this
using the equation for force and integrate with respect to Dr. I'm starting at the Earth's surface. So that's
a distance of 6.4 times 10 to the six meters from the center of the earth, since that's
the earth radius. And I'm ending at a height of two times 10 to the six meters above the
Earth's surface. So that's a distance r of 6.4 plus two, or 8.4 times 10 to the six meters
from the earth center. My only variable for this integral is R. So let me pull out the
constants. And I'll rewrite the one over r squared as r to the minus two. Now I can integrate
an R to the minus two becomes r to the minus one over minus one Rewrite one more time and
substitute in for R to get a preliminary answer of negative GE, capital M lowercase n times
negative 3.72024 times 10 to the minus eight. Now I still need to plug in for capital G,
capital M and lowercase m, my negatives cancel here. And I have G is 6.67 times 10 to the
minus 11. capital M, the mass of the Earth is six times 10 to the 24, and lowercase and
the mass the satellite was 1000 kilograms. Multiplying all these numbers together, gives
us a final answer of approximately 1.5 times 10 to the 10th. jewels. To put this number
in perspective, this is about the same amount of work done by a car in a year, or by the
human heart beating for about 400 years. In this video, we saw that for a constant force
work is just equal to the force times distance. But for a variable force work is equal to
the integral of force with respect to distance. This video introduces the idea of an average
value of a function. To take the average of a finite list of numbers, we just add the
numbers up and divide by n, the number of numbers. In summation notation, we write the
sum from i equals one to n of Q i all divided by n. But defining the average value of a
continuous function is a little different. Because a function can take on infinitely
many values on an interval from a to be, we could estimate the average value of the function
by sampling it at a finite Li many evenly spaced x values. I'll call them x one through
x n. And let's assume that they're spaced a distance of delta x apart, then the average
value of f at these sample points is just the sum of the values of f divided by n, the
number of values are in summation notation, the sum from i equals one to n of f of x i
all divided by n. This is an approximate average value of f, since we're just using n sample
points. But the approximation gets better as the number of sample points n gets bigger
and bigger. So we could define the average as the limit as n goes to infinity of the
sample average. I'd like to make this look more like a Riemann sum. So I need to get
delta x in there. So I'm just going to multiply the top and the bottom by delta x. And notice
that n times delta x is just the length of the interval b minus a. Now as the number
of sample points goes to infinity, delta x, the distance between them goes to zero. So
I can rewrite my limit as the limit as delta x goes to zero of the sum of FX II times delta
x divided by b minus a. Now the limit of this Riemann sum in the numerator is just the integral
from a to b of f of x dx. And so the average value of the function is given by the integral
on the interval from a to b divided by the length of the interval. I'm starting at the Earth's surface. So that's
a distance of 6.4 times 10 to the six meters from the center of the earth, since that's
the earth radius. And I'm ending at a height of two times 10 to the six meters above the
Earth's surface. So that's a distance r of 6.4 plus two, or 8.4 times 10 to the six meters
from the earth center. My only variable for this integral is R. So let me pull out the
constants. And I'll rewrite the one over r squared as r to the minus two. Now I can integrate
an R to the minus two becomes r to the minus one over minus one Rewrite one more time and
substitute in for R to get a preliminary answer of negative GE, capital M lowercase n times
negative 3.72024 times 10 to the minus eight. Now I still need to plug in for capital G,
capital M and lowercase m, my negatives cancel here. And I have G is 6.67 times 10 to the
minus 11. capital M, the mass of the Earth is six times 10 to the 24, and lowercase and
the mass the satellite was 1000 kilograms. Multiplying all these numbers together, gives
us a final answer of approximately 1.5 times 10 to the 10th. jewels. To put this number
in perspective, this is about the same amount of work done by a car in a year, or by the
human heart beating for about 400 years. In this video, we saw that for a constant force
work is just equal to the force times distance. But for a variable force work is equal to
the integral of force with respect to distance. This video introduces the idea of an average
value of a function. To take the average of a finite list of numbers, we just add the
numbers up and divide by n, the number of numbers. In summation notation, we write the
sum from i equals one to n of Q i all divided by n. But defining the average value of a
continuous function is a little different. Because a function can take on infinitely
many values on an interval from a to be, we could estimate the average value of the function
by sampling it at a finite Li many evenly spaced x values. I'll call them x one through
x n. And let's assume that they're spaced a distance of delta x apart, then the average
value of f at these sample points is just the sum of the values of f divided by n, the
number of values are in summation notation, the sum from i equals one to n of f of x i
all divided by n. This is an approximate average value of f, since we're just using n sample
points. But the approximation gets better as the number of sample points n gets bigger
and bigger. So we could define the average as the limit as n goes to infinity of the
sample average. I'd like to make this look more like a Riemann sum. So I need to get
delta x in there. So I'm just going to multiply the top and the bottom by delta x. And notice
that n times delta x is just the length of the interval b minus a. Now as the number
of sample points goes to infinity, delta x, the distance between them goes to zero. So
I can rewrite my limit as the limit as delta x goes to zero of the sum of FX II times delta
x divided by b minus a. Now the limit of this Riemann sum in the numerator is just the integral
from a to b of f of x dx. And so the average value of the function is given by the integral
on the interval from a to b divided by the length of the interval. Notice the similarity between the formula
for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a list of
numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the list of numbers.
And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to n, the number
of numbers in the list of numbers. Now let's work an example. For the function g of x equals
one over one minus 5x. On the interval from two to five. We know that the average value
of G is given by the integral from two to five of one over one minus 5x dx divided by
the length of that interval. I'm going to use use of the tuition to integrate. So I'm
going to set u equal to one minus 5x. So d u is negative five dx. In other words, dx
is negative 1/5 times do. Looking at my bounds of integration, when x is equal to two, u
is equal to one minus five times two, which is negative nine. And when x is equal to five,
u is equal to negative 24. substituting into my integral, I get the integral from negative
nine to negative 24 of one over u times negative 1/5. Do and that's divided by three. Now dividing
by three is same as multiplying by 1/3. And as I integrate, I'm going to pull the negative
1/5 out, and then take the integral of one over u, that's ln of the absolute value of
u, evaluated in between negative 24 and negative nine. The absolute value signs are important
here, because they prevent me from trying to take the natural log of negative numbers.
To evaluate, I get negative 1/15 times ln of 24 minus ln of nine, I can use my log rules
to simplify and get negative 1/15 ln of 24 over nine, that's negative 1/15 ln of eight
thirds, and as a decimal, that's approximately negative 0.0654. So I found the average value
of G. Now my next question is, does g ever achieve that average value, in other words,
is there a number c in the interval from two to five for which GFC equals its average value?
Well, one way to find out is just to set GSC equal to GS average value. In other words,
set one over one minus five c equal to negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and try to solve
for C. There are lots of ways to solve this equation. But I'm going to take the reciprocal
of both sides, subtract one from both sides and divide by negative five. This simplifies
to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5. What which is approximately 3.25. And that
x value does lie inside the interval from two to five. So we've demonstrated that g
does achieve its average value over the interval. But in fact, we could have predicted this
to be true. Gs average value has to lie somewhere between GS minimum value and maximum value
on this interval. And since G is continuous on the interval from two to five, it has to
achieve every value that lies in between as minimum and maximum, including its average
value. The same argument shows that for any continuous function, the function must achieve
its average value on an interval. And this is known as the mean value theorem for integrals.
Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval from a to b, there has to be
at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of c equals its average value, or,
in symbols, f of c equals the integral from a to b of f of x dx divided by b minus a.
This video gave the definition of an average value of a function, and stated the mean value
theorem for integrals. If we rewrite the formula for average value a little, then we can see
a geometric interpretation for average value. The area of the box with height the average
value Notice the similarity between the formula
for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a list of
numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the list of numbers.
And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to n, the number
of numbers in the list of numbers. Now let's work an example. For the function g of x equals
one over one minus 5x. On the interval from two to five. We know that the average value
of G is given by the integral from two to five of one over one minus 5x dx divided by
the length of that interval. I'm going to use use of the tuition to integrate. So I'm
going to set u equal to one minus 5x. So d u is negative five dx. In other words, dx
is negative 1/5 times do. Looking at my bounds of integration, when x is equal to two, u
is equal to one minus five times two, which is negative nine. And when x is equal to five,
u is equal to negative 24. substituting into my integral, I get the integral from negative
nine to negative 24 of one over u times negative 1/5. Do and that's divided by three. Now dividing
by three is same as multiplying by 1/3. And as I integrate, I'm going to pull the negative
1/5 out, and then take the integral of one over u, that's ln of the absolute value of
u, evaluated in between negative 24 and negative nine. The absolute value signs are important
here, because they prevent me from trying to take the natural log of negative numbers.
To evaluate, I get negative 1/15 times ln of 24 minus ln of nine, I can use my log rules
to simplify and get negative 1/15 ln of 24 over nine, that's negative 1/15 ln of eight
thirds, and as a decimal, that's approximately negative 0.0654. So I found the average value
of G. Now my next question is, does g ever achieve that average value, in other words,
is there a number c in the interval from two to five for which GFC equals its average value?
Well, one way to find out is just to set GSC equal to GS average value. In other words,
set one over one minus five c equal to negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and try to solve
for C. There are lots of ways to solve this equation. But I'm going to take the reciprocal
of both sides, subtract one from both sides and divide by negative five. This simplifies
to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5. What which is approximately 3.25. And that
x value does lie inside the interval from two to five. So we've demonstrated that g
does achieve its average value over the interval. But in fact, we could have predicted this
to be true. Gs average value has to lie somewhere between GS minimum value and maximum value
on this interval. And since G is continuous on the interval from two to five, it has to
achieve every value that lies in between as minimum and maximum, including its average
value. The same argument shows that for any continuous function, the function must achieve
its average value on an interval. And this is known as the mean value theorem for integrals.
Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval from a to b, there has to be
at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of c equals its average value, or,
in symbols, f of c equals the integral from a to b of f of x dx divided by b minus a.
This video gave the definition of an average value of a function, and stated the mean value
theorem for integrals. If we rewrite the formula for average value a little, then we can see
a geometric interpretation for average value. The area of the box with height the average
value is the same as the area under the curve. This
video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals. the mean value theorem for
integrals says the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b,
there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value
of f. The first proof that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem. Recall
that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f defined
on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two. If we have some number l in between f of x
one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between x one and x
two Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back to
the mean value theorem for integrals. Now, it's possible that our function f of x might
be constant on the interval from a to b. But if that's true, then our mean value theorem
for integrals holds easily. Because f AF is just equal to that constant, which is equal
to f of c for any c between A and B. So let's assume that f is not constant. Well, like
continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value,
which I'll call little m, and big M. Now, we know that F's average value on the interval
has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value. If you don't believe this,
consider the fact that all of us values on the interval have to lie between big M and
little m. And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than
or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a. Notice
that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant. Now if I divide
all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average
value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted. Now, I just need to apply the
intermediate value theorem with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my
values of f of x one and f of x two. The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved
by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two. And therefore, for some C in my interval
a b. And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals. Now I'm going to give a second
proof for the mean value theorem for integrals. And this time, it's going to be as a corollary
to the regular mean value theorem for functions. Recall that the mean value theorem for functions,
says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior
of that interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative
of g at C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from
a to b. Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention
back to the mean value theorem for integrals. I'm going to define a function g of x to be
the integral from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement
of the mean value theorem for integrals. Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to
a, which is zero. Well, g of B is the integral from a to b of our function. Now, by the fundamental
theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval
a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x. is the same as the area under the curve. This
video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals. the mean value theorem for
integrals says the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b,
there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value
of f. The first proof that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem. Recall
that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f defined
on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two. If we have some number l in between f of x
one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between x one and x
two Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back to
the mean value theorem for integrals. Now, it's possible that our function f of x might
be constant on the interval from a to b. But if that's true, then our mean value theorem
for integrals holds easily. Because f AF is just equal to that constant, which is equal
to f of c for any c between A and B. So let's assume that f is not constant. Well, like
continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value,
which I'll call little m, and big M. Now, we know that F's average value on the interval
has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value. If you don't believe this,
consider the fact that all of us values on the interval have to lie between big M and
little m. And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than
or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a. Notice
that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant. Now if I divide
all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average
value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted. Now, I just need to apply the
intermediate value theorem with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my
values of f of x one and f of x two. The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved
by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two. And therefore, for some C in my interval
a b. And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals. Now I'm going to give a second
proof for the mean value theorem for integrals. And this time, it's going to be as a corollary
to the regular mean value theorem for functions. Recall that the mean value theorem for functions,
says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior
of that interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative
of g at C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from
a to b. Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention
back to the mean value theorem for integrals. I'm going to define a function g of x to be
the integral from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement
of the mean value theorem for integrals. Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to
a, which is zero. Well, g of B is the integral from a to b of our function. Now, by the fundamental
theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval
a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x. And by the mean value theorem for functions,
we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some number
c and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below,
we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus
a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach. This shows that the mean
value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our
function is an integral. And this completes the second proof of the mean value theorem
for integrals. So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different
ways. And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way. In this video,
we'll learn a technique of integration called inner By parts. integration by parts is based
on the product rule for taking derivatives. Recall that the product rule says that when
you take the derivative of a product of two functions, that's equal to the derivative
of the first function times the second function, plus the first function times the derivative
of the second function. If we rearrange this formula, by solving for this last term, we
get f of x times g prime of x is equal to f of x g of x prime minus f prime of x g of
x. Now let's integrate both sides of this equation with respect to x. The integral of
a difference is the difference of the integrals. So I can break up this right hand side into
two integrals. Now the integral of the derivative of f times g is just equal to f times g, by
the fundamental theorem of calculus. And I carry the rest of the formula down. And now
I have a formula relating the integral of f times g prime to the integral of f prime
times G. This formula allows us to rewrite something that might be tricky to integrate,
in terms of something that's hopefully easier to integrate. Although I've written this formula,
using indefinite integrals with no bounds of integration, it would be just as easy to
put on bounds of integration. Now, the fundamental theorem tells us that the integral of the
derivative is the original product of functions evaluated from A to B. There's another version
of this formula that might be a little easier to remember. If we let u equal f of x, and
v equal g of x, then do is equal to f prime of x dx using differential notation, and dv
is equal to g prime of x dx. In this notation, we can rewrite the formula as the integral
of u times dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of v, d U. since V is our G of
X, and D, u is our f prime of x dx. Again, we can include bounds of integration, if we're
working with definite integrals. This will be our key formula for this section. and integrating
using this formula is called integration by parts. Let's use integration by parts to find
the integral of x e to the x dx. Or for formula for integration by parts, says the integral
of u dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of the do. So we need to split up our inner
grand x e to the x dx into the part that we're going to call you, and a part that we're going
to call dv. One natural way to split it up is to let u equal x and dv equal e to the
x dx. But another option might be to make u equal to e to the x and dv equal to x dx
bar, we might decide to make you be the whole product, x e to the x and leave dv as just
dx. And by the mean value theorem for functions,
we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some number
c and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below,
we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus
a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach. This shows that the mean
value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our
function is an integral. And this completes the second proof of the mean value theorem
for integrals. So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different
ways. And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way. In this video,
we'll learn a technique of integration called inner By parts. integration by parts is based
on the product rule for taking derivatives. Recall that the product rule says that when
you take the derivative of a product of two functions, that's equal to the derivative
of the first function times the second function, plus the first function times the derivative
of the second function. If we rearrange this formula, by solving for this last term, we
get f of x times g prime of x is equal to f of x g of x prime minus f prime of x g of
x. Now let's integrate both sides of this equation with respect to x. The integral of
a difference is the difference of the integrals. So I can break up this right hand side into
two integrals. Now the integral of the derivative of f times g is just equal to f times g, by
the fundamental theorem of calculus. And I carry the rest of the formula down. And now
I have a formula relating the integral of f times g prime to the integral of f prime
times G. This formula allows us to rewrite something that might be tricky to integrate,
in terms of something that's hopefully easier to integrate. Although I've written this formula,
using indefinite integrals with no bounds of integration, it would be just as easy to
put on bounds of integration. Now, the fundamental theorem tells us that the integral of the
derivative is the original product of functions evaluated from A to B. There's another version
of this formula that might be a little easier to remember. If we let u equal f of x, and
v equal g of x, then do is equal to f prime of x dx using differential notation, and dv
is equal to g prime of x dx. In this notation, we can rewrite the formula as the integral
of u times dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of v, d U. since V is our G of
X, and D, u is our f prime of x dx. Again, we can include bounds of integration, if we're
working with definite integrals. This will be our key formula for this section. and integrating
using this formula is called integration by parts. Let's use integration by parts to find
the integral of x e to the x dx. Or for formula for integration by parts, says the integral
of u dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of the do. So we need to split up our inner
grand x e to the x dx into the part that we're going to call you, and a part that we're going
to call dv. One natural way to split it up is to let u equal x and dv equal e to the
x dx. But another option might be to make u equal to e to the x and dv equal to x dx
bar, we might decide to make you be the whole product, x e to the x and leave dv as just
dx. Whatever choice we make, we need a u times
dv to be our entire integrand here, and we need dx to be part of dv in order to use proper
differential notation. Let's try using the first choice first. If u is equal to x, then
d u is equal to dx. And if dv is e to the x dx, then we can find V by integrating this
and the integral of e to the x dx is e to the x. plugging into our integration by parts
formula, we have the integral of u dv that's x, e to the x dx is equal to u times v x into
dx minus the integral of vdu. That's e to the x dx. Well, this is looking very promising,
because I know how to integrate e to the x dx. It's just e to the x plus a constant of
integration. And so integration by part has allowed us to compute our integral, let's
check our answer by taking the derivative of what we got the derivative of x, e to the
x minus e to the x plus C is going to be the derivative of x, that's one, times e to the
x plus x times the derivative of e to the x, which is dx, minus the derivative of iliacs,
which is again, the x plus the derivative of C, which is just zero. And since this term
and this term cancel out, we're left with x e to the x, which is exactly what we started
out with as our integrand. So we've checked that our work is correct. Notice that in order
to take the derivative of our answer, we ended up having to use the product rule. And that's
no coincidence, because the formula for integration by parts is really just the product rule used
in reverse. So we were successful in computing this integral using our first choice of u
and dv. But before we leave this problem, let's see what would have happened if we used
a different choice. Instead, if we used you've equal to either the X and dv equal to x dx,
if we done that, then we would have gotten do to be either the x dx, and we would have
computed V by integrating x dx two that get x squared over two. plugging this into our
formula for integration by parts, we would get the integral of udv, that's e to the x
times x dx is equal to u times v, that's e to the x times x squared over two, minus the
integral of vdu. That's x squared over two times e to the x, dx. Now in order to go any
further, we need to be able to compute the integral of x squared over two times e to
the x dx. dividing by two poses no problem, that's just a constant, but the integral of
x squared e to the x that's more complicated than the integral of e to the x times x that
we started with. So we're going the wrong direction here. And this turns out to be a
poor choice of u and dv. I'll let you check that the third choice of u and dv that I suggested
also ends up making things more complicated instead of simpler. So the first choice turned
out to be the best choice for you, and dv. integration by parts works by replacing an
integral of the form u dv by the equivalent expression, u times v minus the integral of
vdu. That's hopefully easier to compute. There are a lot of trig identities that come in
handy when you're doing calculus. But the good news is, if you're willing to do a little
bit of algebra, there are only a few that you really have to memorize. In this video,
I'll tell you my three favorite trig identities, and show you how to derive a bunch more with
very little effort from these three. So I'm going to tell you the three trig identities
that I think everybody should know. Fortunately, all three of them are very easy to remember.
The first one is the Pythagorean identity. That's the identity that says sine squared
of theta plus cosine squared of theta is equal to one. That one's easy to remember, because
it's really just the Pythagorean theorem for triangles in the context of the unit circle. Whatever choice we make, we need a u times
dv to be our entire integrand here, and we need dx to be part of dv in order to use proper
differential notation. Let's try using the first choice first. If u is equal to x, then
d u is equal to dx. And if dv is e to the x dx, then we can find V by integrating this
and the integral of e to the x dx is e to the x. plugging into our integration by parts
formula, we have the integral of u dv that's x, e to the x dx is equal to u times v x into
dx minus the integral of vdu. That's e to the x dx. Well, this is looking very promising,
because I know how to integrate e to the x dx. It's just e to the x plus a constant of
integration. And so integration by part has allowed us to compute our integral, let's
check our answer by taking the derivative of what we got the derivative of x, e to the
x minus e to the x plus C is going to be the derivative of x, that's one, times e to the
x plus x times the derivative of e to the x, which is dx, minus the derivative of iliacs,
which is again, the x plus the derivative of C, which is just zero. And since this term
and this term cancel out, we're left with x e to the x, which is exactly what we started
out with as our integrand. So we've checked that our work is correct. Notice that in order
to take the derivative of our answer, we ended up having to use the product rule. And that's
no coincidence, because the formula for integration by parts is really just the product rule used
in reverse. So we were successful in computing this integral using our first choice of u
and dv. But before we leave this problem, let's see what would have happened if we used
a different choice. Instead, if we used you've equal to either the X and dv equal to x dx,
if we done that, then we would have gotten do to be either the x dx, and we would have
computed V by integrating x dx two that get x squared over two. plugging this into our
formula for integration by parts, we would get the integral of udv, that's e to the x
times x dx is equal to u times v, that's e to the x times x squared over two, minus the
integral of vdu. That's x squared over two times e to the x, dx. Now in order to go any
further, we need to be able to compute the integral of x squared over two times e to
the x dx. dividing by two poses no problem, that's just a constant, but the integral of
x squared e to the x that's more complicated than the integral of e to the x times x that
we started with. So we're going the wrong direction here. And this turns out to be a
poor choice of u and dv. I'll let you check that the third choice of u and dv that I suggested
also ends up making things more complicated instead of simpler. So the first choice turned
out to be the best choice for you, and dv. integration by parts works by replacing an
integral of the form u dv by the equivalent expression, u times v minus the integral of
vdu. That's hopefully easier to compute. There are a lot of trig identities that come in
handy when you're doing calculus. But the good news is, if you're willing to do a little
bit of algebra, there are only a few that you really have to memorize. In this video,
I'll tell you my three favorite trig identities, and show you how to derive a bunch more with
very little effort from these three. So I'm going to tell you the three trig identities
that I think everybody should know. Fortunately, all three of them are very easy to remember.
The first one is the Pythagorean identity. That's the identity that says sine squared
of theta plus cosine squared of theta is equal to one. That one's easy to remember, because
it's really just the Pythagorean theorem for triangles in the context of the unit circle. If I draw a right triangle with angle theta
on a unit circle, it's hi partners has length one, because a unit circle means a circle
of radius one. The base of this triangle has length cosine of theta, because by definition,
cosine of theta is the x coordinate of the point on the unit circle at angle theta. Similarly,
the height of the triangle is sine of theta, because sine of theta means the y coordinate
on the unit circle. So by the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles, we know that
sine theta squared plus cosine theta squared equals one, which is exactly the bit beggary
and identity. The second identities that everybody should know are the even and odd identities.
I guess technically, these are two different identities but they go together, so I'm counting
them as one. The even identity says that cosine of negative theta is equal to cosine of Beta.
In other words, cosine is an even function. And the identity says that sine of negative
theta is equal to negative sine of theta. In other words, sine is an odd function. One
way to remember these identities is by looking at the graphs of sine and cosine. Y equals
cosine x has this bilateral symmetry, so it's an even function. And if I look at the value
of cosine at theta, and cosine at negative theta, my graph has the same height. So cosine
has the same value for both of these angles. The graph of y equals sine x does not have
bilateral symmetry, instead, it's got 180 degree rotational symmetry, which is characteristic
of an odd function. And if I compare the y values, that theta and negative theta, I see
that the y value at negative theta is exactly the opposite as the y value at theta, and
therefore, sine of negative theta is equal to negative sine of theta. Another way to
understand that, even in odd identities, is by going back to the unit circle. If I look
at an angle of theta, compared to an angle of negative theta, the x coordinate, which
is cosine has the same value for both of these angles. So that means cosine of negative theta
is equal to cosine of theta. the y coordinate instead is the opposite. For negative theta,
versus theta, one of them is positive and one of them is negative, but they have the
same magnitude. Therefore, sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta. My
third favorite trig identity is the angle sum formula. Again, there are really two,
one for sine and one for cosine, but they go together, so I'll consider them a single
identity. These identities are easy to remember because there's a song that goes with them.
And the song goes, sine, cosine, cosine, sine, cosine, cosine, minus sign sign, you may recognize
the tune, please sing along with me this time. So remember it 123 go sine cosine cosine sine,
cosine cosine minus sine sine. The only thing you have to remember when you sing the song
is that it gives the sine of A plus B first, and then the cosine of A plus B. So these
are the three trig identities that I think everybody should memorize. Next, I'll show
you how to derive a bunch more trig identities. Pretty simply, from these three. I've written
my three favorite trig identities across the top for easy reference. First of all, we can
derive a couple of good identities just from the beggary and identity. Let's start by dividing
both sides of this identity by cosine squared theta. We can break up the fraction on the
left into sine squared theta over cosine squared theta plus cosine squared theta over cosine
squared theta equals one over cosine squared theta. But sine squared theta over cosine
squared theta is just tan squared theta. and cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta
is one. And one over cosine squared theta is seacon squared theta, since secant theta
by definition is one over cosine. If I draw a right triangle with angle theta
on a unit circle, it's hi partners has length one, because a unit circle means a circle
of radius one. The base of this triangle has length cosine of theta, because by definition,
cosine of theta is the x coordinate of the point on the unit circle at angle theta. Similarly,
the height of the triangle is sine of theta, because sine of theta means the y coordinate
on the unit circle. So by the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles, we know that
sine theta squared plus cosine theta squared equals one, which is exactly the bit beggary
and identity. The second identities that everybody should know are the even and odd identities.
I guess technically, these are two different identities but they go together, so I'm counting
them as one. The even identity says that cosine of negative theta is equal to cosine of Beta.
In other words, cosine is an even function. And the identity says that sine of negative
theta is equal to negative sine of theta. In other words, sine is an odd function. One
way to remember these identities is by looking at the graphs of sine and cosine. Y equals
cosine x has this bilateral symmetry, so it's an even function. And if I look at the value
of cosine at theta, and cosine at negative theta, my graph has the same height. So cosine
has the same value for both of these angles. The graph of y equals sine x does not have
bilateral symmetry, instead, it's got 180 degree rotational symmetry, which is characteristic
of an odd function. And if I compare the y values, that theta and negative theta, I see
that the y value at negative theta is exactly the opposite as the y value at theta, and
therefore, sine of negative theta is equal to negative sine of theta. Another way to
understand that, even in odd identities, is by going back to the unit circle. If I look
at an angle of theta, compared to an angle of negative theta, the x coordinate, which
is cosine has the same value for both of these angles. So that means cosine of negative theta
is equal to cosine of theta. the y coordinate instead is the opposite. For negative theta,
versus theta, one of them is positive and one of them is negative, but they have the
same magnitude. Therefore, sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta. My
third favorite trig identity is the angle sum formula. Again, there are really two,
one for sine and one for cosine, but they go together, so I'll consider them a single
identity. These identities are easy to remember because there's a song that goes with them.
And the song goes, sine, cosine, cosine, sine, cosine, cosine, minus sign sign, you may recognize
the tune, please sing along with me this time. So remember it 123 go sine cosine cosine sine,
cosine cosine minus sine sine. The only thing you have to remember when you sing the song
is that it gives the sine of A plus B first, and then the cosine of A plus B. So these
are the three trig identities that I think everybody should memorize. Next, I'll show
you how to derive a bunch more trig identities. Pretty simply, from these three. I've written
my three favorite trig identities across the top for easy reference. First of all, we can
derive a couple of good identities just from the beggary and identity. Let's start by dividing
both sides of this identity by cosine squared theta. We can break up the fraction on the
left into sine squared theta over cosine squared theta plus cosine squared theta over cosine
squared theta equals one over cosine squared theta. But sine squared theta over cosine
squared theta is just tan squared theta. and cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta
is one. And one over cosine squared theta is seacon squared theta, since secant theta
by definition is one over cosine. So we found a new identity, a variation on
the Pythagorean identity that involves tangent and secant. Now, what if we wanted an identity
that involved cotangent and cosecant instead? Well, as you might be thinking, we could just
start with the theory and identity. And this time, divide both sides by sine squared of
theta. If we break up the fraction like before, we get one plus cotangent squared theta equals
cosecant squared theta. Since cotangent is cosine over sine, and cosecant is one of our
sign. Next, it's possible to get a bunch of great identities from the angle some formulas.
Let's start by deriving an angle difference formula. If we want a formula for sine of
A minus B, all we have to do is plug in negative B for B In our angle some formula. So we get
sine of A cosine of negative b plus cosine of A sine of negative B. But we know that
cosine of negative B is cosine of B, since cosine is 11. And sine of negative b is negative
sine of B, so that turns this positive sign to a negative sign. And we have an angle difference
formula for sine. Similarly, we can use the angle sum formula for cosine, plugging in
negative B for b. and use the even odd properties to get an angle difference formula for cosine.
Now let's derive a super useful formula, the double angle formula. If we want a formula
for sine of two theta, we can think of that as being the sine of theta plus theta. So
let's plug theta in for a and theta in for B in our angle sum formula. That gives us
sine cosine, cosine sine, which simplifies to two sine theta cosine theta. That's the
double angle formula for sine. That worked out so well, let's try the same thing for
cosine. cosine of two theta is cosine of theta plus theta. And using the angle sum formula,
that's cosine, cosine minus sine sine, we can rewrite this as cosine squared theta minus
sine squared theta, and get our first version of the double angle formula for cosine. But
we could also use the Pythagorean identity to replace cosine squared theta by one minus
sine squared theta. Or if we prefer, we can replace sine squared theta by one minus cosine
squared theta. If we replace cosine squared, we get cosine of two theta is one minus sine
squared theta minus sine squared theta. In other words, cosine of two theta is one minus
twice sine squared theta. And if we go back to the original, and replace sine squared
theta by one minus cosine squared theta, we get cosine of two theta is cosine squared
theta minus quantity one minus cosine squared theta, which simplifies to cosine of two theta
is twice cosine squared theta minus one. So we found one version of a double angle formula
for sine, and three versions for cosine, just using the angle sum formula and the Pythagorean
identity. These last two formulas are particularly useful for integration when they're rewritten
slightly. For this formula, let me solve for sine squared of theta, I get two sine squared
of theta is equal to one minus cosine of two theta. So sine squared of theta is one half
minus one half cosine of two theta. I'll do the analogous thing with this formula and
solve for cosine squared theta So we found a new identity, a variation on
the Pythagorean identity that involves tangent and secant. Now, what if we wanted an identity
that involved cotangent and cosecant instead? Well, as you might be thinking, we could just
start with the theory and identity. And this time, divide both sides by sine squared of
theta. If we break up the fraction like before, we get one plus cotangent squared theta equals
cosecant squared theta. Since cotangent is cosine over sine, and cosecant is one of our
sign. Next, it's possible to get a bunch of great identities from the angle some formulas.
Let's start by deriving an angle difference formula. If we want a formula for sine of
A minus B, all we have to do is plug in negative B for B In our angle some formula. So we get
sine of A cosine of negative b plus cosine of A sine of negative B. But we know that
cosine of negative B is cosine of B, since cosine is 11. And sine of negative b is negative
sine of B, so that turns this positive sign to a negative sign. And we have an angle difference
formula for sine. Similarly, we can use the angle sum formula for cosine, plugging in
negative B for b. and use the even odd properties to get an angle difference formula for cosine.
Now let's derive a super useful formula, the double angle formula. If we want a formula
for sine of two theta, we can think of that as being the sine of theta plus theta. So
let's plug theta in for a and theta in for B in our angle sum formula. That gives us
sine cosine, cosine sine, which simplifies to two sine theta cosine theta. That's the
double angle formula for sine. That worked out so well, let's try the same thing for
cosine. cosine of two theta is cosine of theta plus theta. And using the angle sum formula,
that's cosine, cosine minus sine sine, we can rewrite this as cosine squared theta minus
sine squared theta, and get our first version of the double angle formula for cosine. But
we could also use the Pythagorean identity to replace cosine squared theta by one minus
sine squared theta. Or if we prefer, we can replace sine squared theta by one minus cosine
squared theta. If we replace cosine squared, we get cosine of two theta is one minus sine
squared theta minus sine squared theta. In other words, cosine of two theta is one minus
twice sine squared theta. And if we go back to the original, and replace sine squared
theta by one minus cosine squared theta, we get cosine of two theta is cosine squared
theta minus quantity one minus cosine squared theta, which simplifies to cosine of two theta
is twice cosine squared theta minus one. So we found one version of a double angle formula
for sine, and three versions for cosine, just using the angle sum formula and the Pythagorean
identity. These last two formulas are particularly useful for integration when they're rewritten
slightly. For this formula, let me solve for sine squared of theta, I get two sine squared
of theta is equal to one minus cosine of two theta. So sine squared of theta is one half
minus one half cosine of two theta. I'll do the analogous thing with this formula and
solve for cosine squared theta to cosine squared theta is equal to one plus
cosine of two theta. So cosine squared theta is equal to one half, plus one half cosine
of two theta. That's all the triggers in these we're gonna need. It may seem like a lot,
but remember, they all follow very naturally from my three favorites at the top. Well,
all these formulas are very useful. The ones that are of particular importance for techniques
of integration are the first one, that factory and identity and its various forms. And the
last two. In this video, I told you my three favorite trig identities, the Pythagorean
identity, the even an odd identities and the angle some formulas. From these I derived
a bunch of other identities, including a handful that will be particularly useful as we do
techniques of integration. Remember the angle some formulas, those are the formulas for
computing sine of A plus B, and cosine of A plus B. I like to sing them, sine, cosine,
cosine, sine, cosine, cosine minus sine sine. This video gives a geometric proof of those
formulas. There are many great proofs of the angle some formulas, but I'd like to share
with you one of my favorites for those who are interested. Alright, the angle some formulas
up here, so we'll know what we're trying to prove. To prove these formulas, let me start
by drawing an angle A and angle B on top of that. Next, I'm going to draw a line perpendicular
to this middle line. And I'm going to extend the top line until it meets that perpendicular,
making a right triangle. Finally, I'll draw a rectangle around that right triangle that
just touches its vertices. My rectangle is now divided up into four right triangles.
And I'm going to choose units of measurement, so that the high partners of my middle triangle
has length one. Now let's stop for a minute to think about the angles of these other triangles.
Since the top and the bottom edge of the rectangle are parallel lines, and this high partners
is a transversal. This angle up here must have the same measure as a plus b down here.
Also, this skinny angle here must have the same measure as a down here. Because this
angle is 180 degrees, minus 90 degrees minus this angle here. And this angle A is also
180 degrees, the measure of the angles in a triangle minus 90 degrees minus that same
angle. to cosine squared theta is equal to one plus
cosine of two theta. So cosine squared theta is equal to one half, plus one half cosine
of two theta. That's all the triggers in these we're gonna need. It may seem like a lot,
but remember, they all follow very naturally from my three favorites at the top. Well,
all these formulas are very useful. The ones that are of particular importance for techniques
of integration are the first one, that factory and identity and its various forms. And the
last two. In this video, I told you my three favorite trig identities, the Pythagorean
identity, the even an odd identities and the angle some formulas. From these I derived
a bunch of other identities, including a handful that will be particularly useful as we do
techniques of integration. Remember the angle some formulas, those are the formulas for
computing sine of A plus B, and cosine of A plus B. I like to sing them, sine, cosine,
cosine, sine, cosine, cosine minus sine sine. This video gives a geometric proof of those
formulas. There are many great proofs of the angle some formulas, but I'd like to share
with you one of my favorites for those who are interested. Alright, the angle some formulas
up here, so we'll know what we're trying to prove. To prove these formulas, let me start
by drawing an angle A and angle B on top of that. Next, I'm going to draw a line perpendicular
to this middle line. And I'm going to extend the top line until it meets that perpendicular,
making a right triangle. Finally, I'll draw a rectangle around that right triangle that
just touches its vertices. My rectangle is now divided up into four right triangles.
And I'm going to choose units of measurement, so that the high partners of my middle triangle
has length one. Now let's stop for a minute to think about the angles of these other triangles.
Since the top and the bottom edge of the rectangle are parallel lines, and this high partners
is a transversal. This angle up here must have the same measure as a plus b down here.
Also, this skinny angle here must have the same measure as a down here. Because this
angle is 180 degrees, minus 90 degrees minus this angle here. And this angle A is also
180 degrees, the measure of the angles in a triangle minus 90 degrees minus that same
angle. So I'll label this skinny angle with a. Next,
let's figure out as many side lengths as we can. So I'll label this skinny angle with a. Next,
let's figure out as many side lengths as we can. Based on the middle right triangle with high
partners one, we know that this side length down here must be cosine of B, since adjacent
over hypotenuse is cosine B. Similarly, this side length here must be sine of B. Since
opposite of our hypothesis is sine of B, now we see that sine of B is the hypotenuse of
this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sign a time sign
B. That's because the opposite over the hypothesis of this angle has to equal sign a. A similar
argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine A time sign B. Please pause
the video and take a moment to fill in the side length of this right triangle. And this
right triangle, you should be getting sine A cosine B cosine A cosine B sine of A plus
B and cosine of A plus B. But remember, we have a rectangle here. So the opposite sides
have equal length. This tells us that sine of A plus B has to equal sine of A cosine
of B plus cosine of A sine of B, which is exactly the first angle sum formula. Also,
cosine of A plus B, which is this side length, is exactly the difference of this side length
cosine A cosine B minus this side length sine of A sine B. And that's the second angle sum
formula. So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof of the angle some formulas.
This video is about integrating trig functions that involve at least one odd power of sine
or cosine. Let's start by evaluating the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine x dx.
This integral is a good candidate for u substitution. If we let u equal sine of x Then d u is equal
to cosine of x dx. And we can rewrite the integral as the integral of u to the fourth
do this integrates easily to 1/5 times u to the fifth plus C. And I can convert things
back to x by plugging in sine of x for you, to get 1/5 sine to the fifth of x plus C.
The next integral, the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine cubed x dx can also
be handled with a similar use of the tuition with a bit more work. First, I'm going to
rewrite the integral as the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine squared x times
cosine of x dx. I'm rewriting the cosine cubed of x as cosine squared of x times cosine x
in the hopes that I can use cosine of x dx as my d u, like I did in the previous problem.
Now if we have d u, as cosine of x, dx, we're going to need you to be sine of x. But unlike
the previous problem, I can't just replace sine of the fourth x with you to the fourth
and cosine x dx with D, U and be done. Because I've got this cosine squared x hanging around
that I need to deal with. I wish I didn't have that cosine squared x, I wish everything
else over here was just written in terms of sine. Now, as you might realize, it's not
hard for me to get my wish. We know from the Pythagorean identity, that cosine squared
of x plus sine squared of x is equal to one. So cosine squared of x can be written as one
minus sine squared x. Making that substitution, I can now rewrite my integral entirely in
terms of you. And do now if I multiply things out, this becomes easy to integrate, I get
1/5 u to the fifth minus 1/7 u to the seventh plus C. And I can rewrite this in terms of
x. Based on the middle right triangle with high
partners one, we know that this side length down here must be cosine of B, since adjacent
over hypotenuse is cosine B. Similarly, this side length here must be sine of B. Since
opposite of our hypothesis is sine of B, now we see that sine of B is the hypotenuse of
this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sign a time sign
B. That's because the opposite over the hypothesis of this angle has to equal sign a. A similar
argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine A time sign B. Please pause
the video and take a moment to fill in the side length of this right triangle. And this
right triangle, you should be getting sine A cosine B cosine A cosine B sine of A plus
B and cosine of A plus B. But remember, we have a rectangle here. So the opposite sides
have equal length. This tells us that sine of A plus B has to equal sine of A cosine
of B plus cosine of A sine of B, which is exactly the first angle sum formula. Also,
cosine of A plus B, which is this side length, is exactly the difference of this side length
cosine A cosine B minus this side length sine of A sine B. And that's the second angle sum
formula. So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof of the angle some formulas.
This video is about integrating trig functions that involve at least one odd power of sine
or cosine. Let's start by evaluating the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine x dx.
This integral is a good candidate for u substitution. If we let u equal sine of x Then d u is equal
to cosine of x dx. And we can rewrite the integral as the integral of u to the fourth
do this integrates easily to 1/5 times u to the fifth plus C. And I can convert things
back to x by plugging in sine of x for you, to get 1/5 sine to the fifth of x plus C.
The next integral, the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine cubed x dx can also
be handled with a similar use of the tuition with a bit more work. First, I'm going to
rewrite the integral as the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine squared x times
cosine of x dx. I'm rewriting the cosine cubed of x as cosine squared of x times cosine x
in the hopes that I can use cosine of x dx as my d u, like I did in the previous problem.
Now if we have d u, as cosine of x, dx, we're going to need you to be sine of x. But unlike
the previous problem, I can't just replace sine of the fourth x with you to the fourth
and cosine x dx with D, U and be done. Because I've got this cosine squared x hanging around
that I need to deal with. I wish I didn't have that cosine squared x, I wish everything
else over here was just written in terms of sine. Now, as you might realize, it's not
hard for me to get my wish. We know from the Pythagorean identity, that cosine squared
of x plus sine squared of x is equal to one. So cosine squared of x can be written as one
minus sine squared x. Making that substitution, I can now rewrite my integral entirely in
terms of you. And do now if I multiply things out, this becomes easy to integrate, I get
1/5 u to the fifth minus 1/7 u to the seventh plus C. And I can rewrite this in terms of
x. To recap, we separated out one copy of cosine
x to be part of our D U. And then we converted the rest of the cosines in the signs isn't
a Pythagorean identity. This allowed us to do use of the tuition with u equal to sine
x and evaluate the integral. This same technique with some modifications works on a lot of
other problems. In this next problem, if we tried separating out one copy of cosine of
x to be part of our do, we'd run into problems, because we just have one copy of cosine x
left. And we can't use the Pythagorean identity can to convert a single cosine into signs.
Well, I guess technically, we could do something like this. But then we'd have to introduce
a plus or minus sign and a square root sign into our integrand, which would make things
difficult to integrate. It's a lot easier if we can just use the cosine squared x is
equal to one minus sine squared x identity to replace our cosines with signs. But this
identity only applies if we have an even power of cosines leftover that we want to convert.
So instead of trying to save out a copy of cosine x, let's say about a copy of sine x
instead. So we'll rewrite our integral as the integral of sine to the fourth of x times
a sine of x. And we'll keep the cosine squared x and the dx. Now we want the sine x to be
part of our D U. So let's set u equal to cosine of x. That way d u is equal to negative sine
of x dx. And so sine of x dx is equal to negative d U. since u is equal to cosine x, this time,
we want to replace all of our stray signs with cosines. We know that sine squared of
x is equal to one minus cosine squared of x by the Pythagorean identity. So let's rewrite
this sine to the fourth as sine squared of x squared. That allows us to substitute in
one minus cosine squared of x for sine squared of x And now we can replace everything with
us and d is I'll bring out the negative sign and multiply things out. One minus u squared
squared is one minus two u squared plus u to the fourth. And this multiplies out to
us squared minus two u to the fourth plus u to the sixth. Now I can integrate, distribute
my negative sign. And finally, plug in cosine of x for you. That completes this problem.
In this video, we'll use use substitution and the Pythagorean identity. To evaluate
integrals with at least one odd power of sine or cosine. The idea is to separate off one
copy from the odd power that one copy becomes part of our D U. and the remaining even power
gets converted using the Pythagorean identity. In this case, we convert sine squared into
one minus cosine squared. This allows us to do the use substitution and evaluate the integral.
In this video, we'll evaluate integrals of trig functions involving only even powers
of sine and cosine. There are three trig identities that will come in handy here, the first ones
that are familiar, the factory and identity. The second one's an identity that allows us
to rewrite cosine squared of x in terms of cosine of 2x. And the third one is in nd that
lets us write sine squared of x. Also in terms of cosine of 2x. The only difference between
the second and third is the fact that one's cosine squared and one sine squared. But the
other difference is the plus sign versus the minus sign here. To recap, we separated out one copy of cosine
x to be part of our D U. And then we converted the rest of the cosines in the signs isn't
a Pythagorean identity. This allowed us to do use of the tuition with u equal to sine
x and evaluate the integral. This same technique with some modifications works on a lot of
other problems. In this next problem, if we tried separating out one copy of cosine of
x to be part of our do, we'd run into problems, because we just have one copy of cosine x
left. And we can't use the Pythagorean identity can to convert a single cosine into signs.
Well, I guess technically, we could do something like this. But then we'd have to introduce
a plus or minus sign and a square root sign into our integrand, which would make things
difficult to integrate. It's a lot easier if we can just use the cosine squared x is
equal to one minus sine squared x identity to replace our cosines with signs. But this
identity only applies if we have an even power of cosines leftover that we want to convert.
So instead of trying to save out a copy of cosine x, let's say about a copy of sine x
instead. So we'll rewrite our integral as the integral of sine to the fourth of x times
a sine of x. And we'll keep the cosine squared x and the dx. Now we want the sine x to be
part of our D U. So let's set u equal to cosine of x. That way d u is equal to negative sine
of x dx. And so sine of x dx is equal to negative d U. since u is equal to cosine x, this time,
we want to replace all of our stray signs with cosines. We know that sine squared of
x is equal to one minus cosine squared of x by the Pythagorean identity. So let's rewrite
this sine to the fourth as sine squared of x squared. That allows us to substitute in
one minus cosine squared of x for sine squared of x And now we can replace everything with
us and d is I'll bring out the negative sign and multiply things out. One minus u squared
squared is one minus two u squared plus u to the fourth. And this multiplies out to
us squared minus two u to the fourth plus u to the sixth. Now I can integrate, distribute
my negative sign. And finally, plug in cosine of x for you. That completes this problem.
In this video, we'll use use substitution and the Pythagorean identity. To evaluate
integrals with at least one odd power of sine or cosine. The idea is to separate off one
copy from the odd power that one copy becomes part of our D U. and the remaining even power
gets converted using the Pythagorean identity. In this case, we convert sine squared into
one minus cosine squared. This allows us to do the use substitution and evaluate the integral.
In this video, we'll evaluate integrals of trig functions involving only even powers
of sine and cosine. There are three trig identities that will come in handy here, the first ones
that are familiar, the factory and identity. The second one's an identity that allows us
to rewrite cosine squared of x in terms of cosine of 2x. And the third one is in nd that
lets us write sine squared of x. Also in terms of cosine of 2x. The only difference between
the second and third is the fact that one's cosine squared and one sine squared. But the
other difference is the plus sign versus the minus sign here. Let's start with the simplest possible even
power, the integral of cosine squared x dx. According to my calculator, this integral
evaluates to sine x cosine x over two plus x over two. And if I look it up in the back
of my book, I get the integral to be one half x plus one for a sine of 2x. So what's going
on here? Are these two answers really the same? Well, yes, because sine of 2x is equal
to two times sine x cosine x. So if I replace that, here, I get this second answer is equivalent
to one half x plus 1/4 times two sine x cosine x, which is equivalent to the first answer.
Notice that the calculator on the table in the back of the book omit the plus c the cost
of integration, but you should always include them for indefinite integrals. Now let's see
where these answers come from. So let's compute the integral of cosine squared x dx by hand
that is, without the aid of a calculator or computer integral table, the hint is that
cosine squared x is equal to one plus cosine 2x over two, or sometimes I like to write
this as one half plus one half cosine of 2x. So I'll use that identity to rewrite my integral.
Now I can split up the integral using rules about integration. The integral of one half
is just one half x, and the integral of cosine of 2x is one half times sine of 2x. It's possible
to get that answer by use substitution with u equal to x. Or as a shortcut, we can observe
that the derivative of sine of 2x is cosine of 2x times two, the times two comes from
the chain rule taking the derivative of the inside. So to get rid of that, or counteract
that, times two, we have to multiply by one half. In any case, our final answer is then
one half x plus 1/4 sine of 2x plus C. This is the same answer that we can find using
the integral table in the back of the book. Please pause the video for a minute and try
to compute the integral of sine squared x dx. Using a similar technique. You'll want
to use the identity sine squared of x is equal to one half minus one Half cosine of 2x. If
you rewrite the integral, you can integrate like before, and get an answer of one half
x minus 1/4 sine of 2x plus C, the same technique can be used to evaluate a lot of other integrals
involving even powers of sine and cosine, often with a lot more effort. Let's try evaluating
the integral of sine to the sixth x dx. We know that sine squared of x is equal to one
half minus one half cosine of 2x. And since six is an even power, we know we can rewrite
sine to the sixth as sine squared to the x raised to a power, in this case, the power
of three. Now let's substitute in our identity. I think I'm going to factor out the one half.
One half cubed is 1/8. So I'll pull the one eight out of the integral side and multiply
out. Now let me divide up my integral into pieces. And I'll try to handle each piece
separately. The integral of one dx, that's easy, that's x, and the integral of cosine
of 2x, that's going to be one half times sine of 2x, like before. Now to integrate cosine
squared of 2x, we can use the same trick we used to integrate cosine squared of x, cosine
squared of 2x is going to be one half, plus one half cosine of two times 2x. So that's
4x. Let's start with the simplest possible even
power, the integral of cosine squared x dx. According to my calculator, this integral
evaluates to sine x cosine x over two plus x 
over two. And if I look it up in the back of my book, I get the integral to be one half
x plus one for a sine of 2x. So what's going on here? Are these two answers really the
same? Well, yes, because sine of 2x is equal to two times sine x cosine x. So if I replace
that, here, I get this second answer is equivalent to one half x plus 1/4 times two sine x cosine
x, which is equivalent to the first answer. Notice that the calculator on the table in
the back of the book omit the plus c the cost of integration, but you should always include
them for indefinite integrals. Now let's see where these answers come from. So let's compute
the integral of cosine squared x dx by hand that is, without the aid of a calculator or
computer integral table, the hint is that cosine squared x is equal to one plus cosine
2x over two, or sometimes I like to write this as one half plus one half cosine of 2x.
So I'll use that identity to rewrite my integral. Now I can split up the integral using rules
about integration. The integral of one half is just one half x, and the integral of cosine
of 2x is one half times sine of 2x. It's possible to get that answer by use substitution with
u equal to x. Or as a shortcut, we can observe that the derivative of sine of 2x is cosine
of 2x times two, the times two comes from the chain rule taking the derivative of the
inside. So to get rid of that, or counteract that, times two, we have to multiply by one
half. In any case, our final answer is then one half x plus 1/4 sine of 2x plus C. This
is the same answer that we can find using the integral table in the back of the book.
Please pause the video for a minute and try to compute the integral of sine squared x
dx. Using a similar technique. You'll want to use the identity sine squared of x is equal
to one half minus one Half cosine of 2x. If you rewrite the integral, you can integrate
like before, and get an answer of one half x minus 1/4 sine of 2x plus C, the same technique
can be used to evaluate a lot of other integrals involving even powers of sine and cosine,
often with a lot more effort. Let's try evaluating the integral of sine to the sixth x dx. We
know that sine squared of x is equal to one half minus one half cosine of 2x. And since
six is an even power, we know we can rewrite sine to the sixth as sine squared to the x
raised to a power, in this case, the power of three. Now let's substitute in our identity.
I think I'm going to factor out the one half. One half cubed is 1/8. So I'll pull the one
eight out of the integral side and multiply out. Now let me divide up my integral into
pieces. And I'll try to handle each piece separately. The integral of one dx, that's
easy, that's x, and the integral of cosine of 2x, that's going to be one half times sine
of 2x, like before. Now to integrate cosine squared of 2x, we can use the same trick we
used to integrate cosine squared of x, cosine squared of 2x is going to be one half, plus
one half cosine of two times 2x. So that's 4x. And finally, to integrate cosine cubed of
2x, well, cosine cubed is an odd power, so we can use our odd power trick and save aside
one copy of cosine, and turn the remaining cosine squared into one minus sine squared.
So that looks like this. Notice we have one minus sine squared of 2x. Because we're replacing
a cosine squared of 2x. I'll copy the first part down. Now integrate one half to get one
half x, and I'll integrate one half cosine of forex. To get one half times 1/4 sine of
forex, we need the 1/4. To counteract the four that we get by taking the derivative
of sine of 4x. And using the chain rule, we can finish off the integration by using a
use substitution here where u is sine of 2x. And so d u is two cosine of 2x. So we can
replace this integral here with minus the integral of one minus us squared times, one
half do I'll copy the first part down again. and integrate that last part, I'll pull out
the negative a half, and I get you minus 1/3 u cubed, I need a plus C. Now. I'll plug back
in for you and simplify a little bit. And I get a final answer of five sixteenths x
minus one for sine of 2x plus 360 fourths sine of 4x plus 148, sine cubed of 2x. Oh,
and we need a plus C here. That's a complicated answer. And it was a complicated computation.
But it was all based on the same sort of tricks as before, using identities like this one,
to handle even powers of sine and cosine, and using the Pythagorean identity to handle
odd powers. In this video, we use these last two identities to rewrite even powers of cosine
and sine in terms of lower powers of cosine. This trick can be used to compute the integrals
of complicated even powers of sine and cosine, provided that you have a lot of time and patience
on hand. This video is about some special trig integrals, namely, the integral of tangent
squared of x and the integral of secant of x. these integrals are special only in the
sense that there's some special tricks required to integrate them. When I come across the
integral of tangent squared X, I find myself wishing that I could integrate secant squared
x instead, because integrating secant squared x is easy. It's just tangent x plus c since
the derivative of a tangent secant squared. But happily, I know how to rewrite tangent
squared in terms of secant, because tangent squared is secant squared minus one. So I'll
just rewrite this integral as the integral of secant squared minus one. And that integrates
easily to tangent of x minus x plus C. The same sort of trick works to integrate cotangent
squared of x, since there's a similar identity, relating cotangent and cosecant every now
and then, you have to integrate secant of x. There's several possible tricks that can
be used to do this. One of them is to multiply secant x by secant x plus tangent x in the
numerator and denominator. Now distributing, we get seacon squared x plus seek index tangent
x in the numerator, and secant x plus tangent x in the denominator. Since secant squared
is the derivative of tangent, and secant tangent is the root of a secant. We can say u equal
to secant x plus tangent x and have d u, sitting right where we want it in the integrand. And finally, to integrate cosine cubed of
2x, well, cosine cubed is an odd power, so we can use our odd power trick and save aside
one copy of cosine, and turn the remaining cosine squared into one minus sine squared.
So that looks like this. Notice we have one minus sine squared of 2x. Because we're replacing
a cosine squared of 2x. I'll copy the first part down. Now integrate one half to get one
half x, and I'll integrate one half cosine of forex. To get one half times 1/4 sine of
forex, we need the 1/4. To counteract the four that we get by taking the derivative
of sine of 4x. And using the chain rule, we can finish off the integration by using a
use substitution here where u is sine of 2x. And so d u is two cosine of 2x. So we can
replace this integral here with minus the integral of one minus us squared times, one
half do I'll copy the first part down again. and integrate that last part, I'll pull out
the negative a half, and I get you minus 1/3 u cubed, I need a plus C. Now. I'll plug back
in for you and simplify a little bit. And I get a final answer of five sixteenths x
minus one for sine of 2x plus 360 fourths sine of 4x plus 148, sine cubed of 2x. Oh,
and we need a plus C here. That's a complicated answer. And it was a complicated computation.
But it was all based on the same sort of tricks as before, using identities like this one,
to handle even powers of sine and cosine, and using the Pythagorean identity to handle
odd powers. In this video, we use these last two identities to rewrite even powers of cosine
and sine in terms of lower powers of cosine. This trick can be used to compute the integrals
of complicated even powers of sine and cosine, provided that you have a lot of time and patience
on hand. This video is about some special trig integrals, namely, the integral of tangent
squared of x and the integral of secant of x. these integrals are special only in the
sense that there's some special tricks required to integrate them. When I come across the
integral of tangent squared X, I find myself wishing that I could integrate secant squared
x instead, because integrating secant squared x is easy. It's just tangent x plus c since
the derivative of a tangent secant squared. But happily, I know how to rewrite tangent
squared in terms of secant, because tangent squared is secant squared minus one. So I'll
just rewrite this integral as the integral of secant squared minus one. And that integrates
easily to tangent of x minus x plus C. The same sort of trick works to integrate cotangent
squared of x, since there's a similar identity, relating cotangent and cosecant every now
and then, you have to integrate secant of x. There's several possible tricks that can
be used to do this. One of them is to multiply secant x by secant x plus tangent x in the
numerator and denominator. Now distributing, we get seacon squared x plus seek index tangent
x in the numerator, and secant x plus tangent x in the denominator. Since secant squared
is the derivative of tangent, and secant tangent is the root of a secant. We can say u equal
to secant x plus tangent x and have d u, sitting right where we want it in the integrand. So now we just have to integrate one over
u d u, which is the ln of u plus C. And now plugging back in for you, we get that our
original integral of seeking dx evaluates to the natural log of secant x plus tangent
x plus a constant. A similar trick can be used to evaluate the integral of cosecant
x. And that's all for the integral of tangent squared, and the integral of secant. This
video introduces the technique of trig substitution to evaluate integrals involving square root
signs like this one. There are a few trig identities that are especially useful for
this technique. The first one's the Pythagorean identity. And the second is the related identity
that involves tangent and secant. There's also a third related identity that involves
cotangent cosecant. This one could also be used in the method of tree substitution, although
it doesn't come up as often as the first two. As our first example, let's look at the integral
of x squared over the square root of 49 minus x squared. According to Wolfram Alpha, this
integral evaluates to this expression involving a square root expression kind of an as expected
and a sine inverse, which just sort of come seems to come out of the blue here. Let's
see where this answer comes from. Using a trig substitution. The inverse sine function
in the answer gives us a hint that we may want to substitute in something related to
sign, I'm going to substitute in x equals seven sine theta. If x is seven sine theta,
then dx is going to be seven cosine theta d theta. Now I'll substitute in for x and
dx in my integral to get the integral of seven sine theta squared over the square root of
49 minus seven sine theta squared times seven cosine theta d theta. let me simplify a little.
I have a seven cubed in the numerator times sine squared theta cosine theta. And the nominator
I have 49 minus 49 sine squared theta. I'll factor out the 49 here. And since the square
root of 49 is seven, I can pull a seven out of the square root sign. Now here is where
a little bit of magic occurs. I know that one minus sine squared theta is equal to cosine
squared The data by the Pythagorean identity, and the square root of cosine squared theta
is equal to cosine theta, well, actually, it's equal to the absolute value of cosine
theta, which is the same thing as cosine theta, if cosine theta is positive. Or in other words,
if theta is between pi over two, and negative pi over two, for example, I would really like
to replace my square root of one minus sine squared theta by just cosine theta, not the
absolute value of cosine theta. So I'm just going to assume that theta is between negative
pi over two and pi over two when I make my substitution. This might seem like cheating,
but it's actually legit. Because if you think about the unit circle, as theta ranges from
negative pi over two to pi over two, well, cosine is always positive like we want it
to be. But sine is ranging all the way from negative one to one. And so we can actually
achieve all of the x values between negative seven and seven this way, which are the only
x values in the domain of our function anyway. Now if we go back to our integral, we can
actually replace the square root of one minus sine squared theta with a simple cosine theta,
with success successfully gotten rid of this tricky square root sign, which is the whole
point behind trig substitution. Now, if we simplify, we just have to integrate seven
squared sine squared theta, d theta. And this is a familiar problem that we can solve using
another trig identity. So now we just have to integrate one over
u d u, which is the ln of u plus C. And now plugging back in for you, we get that our
original integral of seeking dx evaluates to the natural log of secant x plus tangent
x plus a constant. A similar trick can be used to evaluate the integral of cosecant
x. And that's all for the integral of tangent squared, and the integral of secant. This
video introduces the technique of trig substitution to evaluate integrals involving square root
signs like this one. There are a few trig identities that are especially useful for
this technique. The first one's the Pythagorean identity. And the second is the related identity
that involves tangent and secant. There's also a third related identity that involves
cotangent cosecant. This one could also be used in the method of tree substitution, although
it doesn't come up as often as the first two. As our first example, let's look at the integral
of x squared over the square root of 49 minus x squared. According to Wolfram Alpha, this
integral evaluates to this expression involving a square root expression kind of an as expected
and a sine inverse, which just sort of come seems to come out of the blue here. Let's
see where this answer comes from. Using a trig substitution. The inverse sine function
in the answer gives us a hint that we may want to substitute in something related to
sign, I'm going to substitute in x equals seven sine theta. If x is seven sine theta,
then dx is going to be seven cosine theta d theta. Now I'll substitute in for x and
dx in my integral to get the integral of seven sine theta squared over the square root of
49 minus seven sine theta squared times seven cosine theta d theta. let me simplify a little.
I have a seven cubed in the numerator times sine squared theta cosine theta. And the nominator
I have 49 minus 49 sine squared theta. I'll factor out the 49 here. And since the square
root of 49 is seven, I can pull a seven out of the square root sign. Now here is where
a little bit of magic occurs. I know that one minus sine squared theta is equal to cosine
squared The data by the Pythagorean identity, and the square root of cosine squared theta
is equal to cosine theta, well, actually, it's equal to the absolute value of cosine
theta, which is the same thing as cosine theta, if cosine theta is positive. Or in other words,
if theta is between pi over two, and negative pi over two, for example, I would really like
to replace my square root of one minus sine squared theta by just cosine theta, not the
absolute value of cosine theta. So I'm just going to assume that theta is between negative
pi over two and pi over two when I make my substitution. This might seem like cheating,
but it's actually legit. Because if you think about the unit circle, as theta ranges from
negative pi over two to pi over two, well, cosine is always positive like we want it
to be. But sine is ranging all the way from negative one to one. And so we can actually
achieve all of the x values between negative seven and seven this way, which are the only
x values in the domain of our function anyway. Now if we go back to our integral, we can
actually replace the square root of one minus sine squared theta with a simple cosine theta,
with success successfully gotten rid of this tricky square root sign, which is the whole
point behind trig substitution. Now, if we simplify, we just have to integrate seven
squared sine squared theta, d theta. And this is a familiar problem that we can solve using
another trig identity. Now we've got an integral we can compute.
So the integral of one half is one half theta, and the integral of cosine of two theta is
one half sine of two theta. So let me add my constant of integration. And I'm almost
done, almost, but not quite. Because this answer is in terms of theta, and my original
problem was in terms of x. Now I know that x and theta are related, according to this
equation here. So if I solve for theta, I get sine theta is equal to x over seven. So
theta is inverse sine or arc sine of x over seven. So I could just plug in for theta here
and get seven squared, that's 49 times one half sine inverse x over seven minus one half
times one half is 1/4. sine of two times sine inverse x over seven plus C. This is a correct
answer. But it's very awkward looking sine of twice sine inverse x over seven, there's
got to be a way to simplify this. Unfortunately, we can't just pull the two out and cancel
the sign with a sine inverse, because sine does work that way. But instead, we can use
the double angle formula. So we can rewrite sine of two theta as twice sine theta cosine
theta. So let me ignore this line for now. And I'll rewrite the above line as 49 times
one half theta, minus 1/4 times twice sine theta, cosine theta Now we've got an integral we can compute.
So the integral of one half is one half theta, and the integral of cosine of two theta is
one half sine of two theta. So let me add my constant of integration. And I'm almost
done, almost, but not quite. Because this answer is in terms of theta, and my original
problem was in terms of x. Now I know that x and theta are related, according to this
equation here. So if I solve for theta, I get sine theta is equal to x over seven. So
theta is inverse sine or arc sine of x over seven. So I could just plug in for theta here
and get seven squared, that's 49 times one half sine inverse x over seven minus one half
times one half is 1/4. sine of two times sine inverse x over seven plus C. This is a correct
answer. But it's very awkward looking sine of twice sine inverse x over seven, there's
got to be a way to simplify this. Unfortunately, we can't just pull the two out and cancel
the sign with a sine inverse, because sine does work that way. But instead, we can use
the double angle formula. So we can rewrite sine of two theta as twice sine theta cosine
theta. So let me ignore this line for now. And I'll rewrite the above line as 49 times
one half theta, minus 1/4 times twice sine theta, cosine theta plus C. plus C. Now there's one more trick we need to use.
And that trick is to draw a right triangle. I'm going to label the sides of that triangle
using the equation for the substitution we made, or this equivalent forms a little easier
to use. So since sine theta is x over seven, if I label one of my angles as theta, then
the opposite side needs to have a measure of x, and I have partners should have a measure
of seven. You can check that by the Pythagorean Theorem, that means that this bottom side
needs to have a measure of the square root of 49 minus x squared. Notice that that's
exactly the same expression that was in our original integrand. Once we have the triangle
labeled, we can use it to find expressions for sine of theta and cosine of theta in terms
of x. So Sine of theta is opposite of our hypothesis. So that's x over seven. Well,
we already knew that. But now cosine of theta is adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's the
square root of 49 minus x squared over seven. We can use these two equations to substitute
in for sine theta and cosine theta. And to get rid of the, this naked theta here, we'll
still have to use the fact that theta is inverse sine of x over seven. Those substitutions
lead us to this answer. And a little bit of simplification leads us to the same answer
that Wolfram Alpha gave us. This was a complicated problem. But the key step was to use this
trig substitution. And then, that allowed us to use a trig identity in order to rewrite
our square root and get rid of the square root. After that, it was a fairly routine
integration problem, until we got to the point where we had to substitute back in for theta,
and then drawing the right triangle helped us figure out what to do. In this video, we
use two trig substitution to evaluate an integral with a square root and that This video introduces
the method of partial fractions as a way to integrate many rational functions. Recall
that a rational function is a function of the form a polynomial divided by another polynomial.
Let's work out the integral of 3x plus two divided by x squared plus 2x minus three.
According to Wolfram Alpha, the integral evaluates to this expression involving the log of x
minus one and the log of x plus three. So what do x minus one and x plus three have
to do with our original rational function, I challenge you to pause the video for a moment
and try to figure this out. You might have noticed that the denominator x squared plus
2x minus three factors into x minus one times x plus three. Let's look at what happens if
I take two separate fractions, one with denominator x minus one and one with denominator x plus
three and add them up. The common denominator of these two fractions is x minus one times
x plus three. So when I add these fractions together using standard algebra, I should
get a fraction with common denominator, x minus one times x plus three. Well, my original
rational function was just such a fraction. So it seems plausible, that I might be able
to find numbers, a and b, so that these two partial fractions add up to this original
fraction. Let's figure out what numbers a and b might make this work. To solve for A
and B, I'm going to clear the denominator by multiplying both sides of my equation by
this least common denominator, x minus 1x plus three. When I distribute on the left
side, I get x plus three times a plus x minus one times B. And on the right side, my x minus
one and x plus three cancel out to give me 3x plus two. I'll distribute the left side
a little further. And I'm going to group the terms that involve x and the terms that don't
involve x. If I want this equation to hold true for all values of x, then I need the
coefficients of x to be the same on the left and the right. Now there's one more trick we need to use.
And that trick is to draw a right triangle. I'm going to label the sides of that triangle
using the equation for the substitution we made, or this equivalent forms a little easier
to use. So since sine theta is x over seven, if I label one of my angles as theta, then
the opposite side needs to have a measure of x, and I have partners should have a measure
of seven. You can check that by the Pythagorean Theorem, that means that this bottom side
needs to have a measure of the square root of 49 minus x squared. Notice that that's
exactly the same expression that was in our original integrand. Once we have the triangle
labeled, we can use it to find expressions for sine of theta and cosine of theta in terms
of x. So Sine of theta is opposite of our hypothesis. So that's x over seven. Well,
we already knew that. But now cosine of theta is adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's the
square root of 49 minus x squared over seven. We can use these two equations to substitute
in for sine theta and cosine theta. And to get rid of the, this naked theta here, we'll
still have to use the fact that theta is inverse sine of x over seven. Those substitutions
lead us to this answer. And a little bit of simplification leads us to the same answer
that Wolfram Alpha gave us. This was a complicated problem. But the key step was to use this
trig substitution. And then, that allowed us to use a trig identity in order to rewrite
our square root and get rid of the square root. After that, it was a fairly routine
integration problem, until we got to the point where we had to substitute back in for theta,
and then drawing the right triangle helped us figure out what to do. In this video, we
use two trig substitution to evaluate an integral with a square root and that This video introduces
the method of partial fractions as a way to integrate many rational functions. Recall
that a rational function is a function of the form a polynomial divided by another polynomial.
Let's work out the integral of 3x plus two divided by x squared plus 2x minus three.
According to Wolfram Alpha, the integral evaluates to this expression involving the log of x
minus one and the log of x plus three. So what do x minus one and x plus three have
to do with our original rational function, I challenge you to pause the video for a moment
and try to figure this out. You might have noticed that the denominator x squared plus
2x minus three factors into x minus one times x plus three. Let's look at what happens if
I take two separate fractions, one with denominator x minus one and one with denominator x plus
three and add them up. The common denominator of these two fractions is x minus one times
x plus three. So when I add these fractions together using standard algebra, I should
get a fraction with common denominator, x minus one times x plus three. Well, my original
rational function was just such a fraction. So it seems plausible, that I might be able
to find numbers, a and b, so that these two partial fractions add up to this original
fraction. Let's figure out what numbers a and b might make this work. To solve for A
and B, I'm going to clear the denominator by multiplying both sides of my equation by
this least common denominator, x minus 1x plus three. When I distribute on the left
side, I get x plus three times a plus x minus one times B. And on the right side, my x minus
one and x plus three cancel out to give me 3x plus two. I'll distribute the left side
a little further. And I'm going to group the terms that involve x and the terms that don't
involve x. If I want this equation to hold true for all values of x, then I need the
coefficients of x to be the same on the left and the right. So I need a plus b to equal three. Similarly,
I need the constant term to be the same on the left and the right. So I need three A
minus B to equal two. I now have two linear equations in the two unknowns, a and b. So
I can use standard algebra to solve these equations for A and B. For example, if I add
the two equations together, the B and negative b cancel out to give me four A equals five,
and so a equals five fourths. And then I can substitute in this five fourths into either
one of my equations and solve for b. So I was able to find an a value of a and b that
let me rewrite the original fraction as to partial fractions. Let me fill those values
of a and b in here. Now to calculate the integral of my original expression, I can calculate
the integral of my partial fractions. Instead, I split up my integrals here. Now the integral
of one over x minus one is natural log of absolute value of x minus one, you can check
this by taking the derivative. Or you can do a simple use of the tuition where you as
x minus one to compute this integral. Similarly, the integral of one over x plus three is natural
log of absolute value of x plus three. This completes the computation of the integral
using the method of partial fractions. Recall that after factoring our denominator, the
key step in this process was finding numbers a and b that made this equation hold. And
you might wonder, Well, yeah, it work this time. But can we always find numbers a and
b that will work like that? What if our numerator had been something different? What if our
numerator had been instead something like, say 7x minus 15? Could we have still found
an A and B that worked? Well, yes, because we still would have gotten two linear equations
in two unknowns down here, and we would have been able to solve them, we'd get different
values of a and b, but we still would have been able to find a solution. Even if our
numerator had just been a number, like six, we still couldn't use the same method, we
could have thought of this as 0x plus six. And we could have used the same equations
down here, where A plus B would have to equals zero, and three, A minus B would have to equal
six. So we still have two equations and two unknowns to solve for. In fact, if you think
about it for a while, you may be able to convince yourself that this method will always work
if you have two conditions. First, the denominator factors into distinct linear factors. By a
linear factor, I just mean that the factor can be written like a number times x plus
another number, with no x squared or anything in it. And by distinct, I just mean that these
two factors are different from each other. The second condition is that the degree of
the numerator is lower than the degree of the denominator. The second condition guarantee
is that we'll have the same number of unknowns here, A and B, as we do coefficients here,
three, and two, so that we'll have equations that we'll be able to solve for our unknowns.
As a technical note, that distinctness of the linear factors guarantees that we won't
have contradictory equations. If we have these two conditions, then we can proceed to integrate,
like we did in this example. In fact, this method even works if we have more than two
linear factors, in our denominator, we can have three or four, any number of distinct
linear factors, it'll just get a little bit more complicated, because we'll have more
constants and more equations to solve for those constants. There are also several related
methods that allow us to integrate rational functions, even if the denominator factors
into linear factors that aren't necessarily distinct. Or even if we can't get all the
way down to linear factors, and some of our factors have squares in them, or even if the
degree of the numerator is too big. But I won't get into the details of those related
methods. In this video, you'll have to read about them in the book or wait for class or
wait for a future video to find out more. In this video, we integrated a rational function
by splitting up the fraction into two partial fractions. So I need a plus b to equal three. Similarly,
I need the constant term to be the same on the left and the right. So I need three A
minus B to equal two. I now have two linear equations in the two unknowns, a and b. So
I can use standard algebra to solve these equations for A and B. For example, if I add
the two equations together, the B and negative b cancel out to give me four A equals five,
and so a equals five fourths. And then I can substitute in this five fourths into either
one of my equations and solve for b. So I was able to find an a value of a and b that
let me rewrite the original fraction as to partial fractions. Let me fill those values
of a and b in here. Now to calculate the integral of my original expression, I can calculate
the integral of my partial fractions. Instead, I split up my integrals here. Now the integral
of one over x minus one is natural log of absolute value of x minus one, you can check
this by taking the derivative. Or you can do a simple use of the tuition where you as
x minus one to compute this integral. Similarly, the integral of one over x plus three is natural
log of absolute value of x plus three. This completes the computation of the integral
using the method of partial fractions. Recall that after factoring our denominator, the
key step in this process was finding numbers a and b that made this equation hold. And
you might wonder, Well, yeah, it work this time. But can we always find numbers a and
b that will work like that? What if our numerator had been something different? What if our
numerator had been instead something like, say 7x minus 15? Could we have still found
an A and B that worked? Well, yes, because we still would have gotten two linear equations
in two unknowns down here, and we would have been able to solve them, we'd get different
values of a and b, but we still would have been able to find a solution. Even if our
numerator had just been a number, like six, we still couldn't use the same method, we
could have thought of this as 0x plus six. And we could have used the same equations
down here, where A plus B would have to equals zero, and three, A minus B would have to equal
six. So we still have two equations and two unknowns to solve for. In fact, if you think
about it for a while, you may be able to convince yourself that this method will always work
if you have two conditions. First, the denominator factors into distinct linear factors. By a
linear factor, I just mean that the factor can be written like a number times x plus
another number, with no x squared or anything in it. And by distinct, I just mean that these
two factors are different from each other. The second condition is that the degree of
the numerator is lower than the degree of the denominator. The second condition guarantee
is that we'll have the same number of unknowns here, A and B, as we do coefficients here,
three, and two, so that we'll have equations that we'll be able to solve for our unknowns.
As a technical note, that distinctness of the linear factors guarantees that we won't
have contradictory equations. If we have these two conditions, then we can proceed to integrate,
like we did in this example. In fact, this method even works if we have more than two
linear factors, in our denominator, we can have three or four, any number of distinct
linear factors, it'll just get a little bit more complicated, because we'll have more
constants and more equations to solve for those constants. There are also several related
methods that allow us to integrate rational functions, even if the denominator factors
into linear factors that aren't necessarily distinct. Or even if we can't get all the
way down to linear factors, and some of our factors have squares in them, or even if the
degree of the numerator is too big. But I won't get into the details of those related
methods. In this video, you'll have to read about them in the book or wait for class or
wait for a future video to find out more. In this video, we integrated a rational function
by splitting up the fraction into two partial fractions. This video is about improper integrals, especially
the first type, which I'll define in a moment. Two examples of improper integrals are the
integral from one to infinity of one over x squared dx, and the integral from zero to
pi over two of tan x dx. What makes these integrals improper? Well, in the first example,
it's this infinity in the bound of integration. And then the second example, is the fact that
the function, tan of x itself goes to infinity on the interval from zero to pi over two where
we're integrating. So an integral is called improper. If either of these two situations
occur. It's called a type one improper integral if we're integrating over an infinite interval.
In other words, there's an infinity or negative infinity somewhere in the bounds of integration.
So the first example, is a type one improper integral. A type two improper integral occurs
when the function that we're integrating itself has an infinite discontinuity on the interval.
by an infinite discontinuity, I mean the function is going to infinity or negative infinity,
this is also called a vertical asymptote. This vertical asymptote could occur in the
interior of the interval we're integrating over. Or, as in this example, it could occur
on the endpoint of that interval of integration. Now, it's possible that both of these situations
could occur for the same integral. And that's also an improper integral. This video will
focus on type one improper integrals. A type one improper integral, asks us to integrate
over an infinite interval. To do this, we take the integral over larger and larger finite
intervals and take the limit. So for example, to find the integral from one to infinity
of one over x squared dx, we'll evaluate the integral from one to some finite number T,
and then take the limit as t goes off to infinity. In symbols, we can write the limit as t goes
to infinity of the integral from one to T of one over x squared dx. Since one over x
squared is the same thing as x to the minus two, we can integrate it to get negative x
to the minus one evaluated between one and T, and then take that limit or rewrite this
as negative one over x and evaluate on the bounds of integration. as t goes to infinity,
one over t goes to zero. So the limit just comes from this expression, which evaluates
to one. If we think of it, the integral is representing area, this is a little surprising.
Even though we're taking the area of an infinitely long region, the area still evaluates to a
finite number of one. In this situation, we say that the improper integral converges.
So in general, the improper integral from some finite number a 
to infinity of f of x dx is defined as the limit as t goes to infinity of the integral
from a to T of f of x dx. We say that the integral converges if this limit exists as
a finite number. And we say that the integral diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative
infinity, or if it doesn't exist. Similarly, we evaluate the integral from negative infinity
to some finite number by taking bigger and bigger intervals that extend off to negative
infinity. That is, this integral is defined as the limit as the left endpoint t goes to
negative infinity of the integral from t to b of f of x dx. We say that this integral
converges if the limit exists as a finite number, and diverges otherwise. So to evaluate
the integral from negative infinity to negative one of one over x dx, we take the limit as
t goes to negative infinity This video is about improper integrals, especially
the first type, which I'll define in a moment. Two examples of improper integrals are the
integral from one to infinity of one over x squared dx, and the integral from zero to
pi over two of tan x dx. What makes these integrals improper? Well, in the first example,
it's this infinity in the bound of integration. And then the second example, is the fact that
the function, tan of x itself goes to infinity on the interval from zero to pi over two where
we're integrating. So an integral is called improper. If either of these two situations
occur. It's called a type one improper integral if we're integrating over an infinite interval.
In other words, there's an infinity or negative infinity somewhere in the bounds of integration.
So the first example, is a type one improper integral. A type two improper integral occurs
when the function that we're integrating itself has an infinite discontinuity on the interval.
by an infinite discontinuity, I mean the function is going to infinity or negative infinity,
this is also called a vertical asymptote. This vertical asymptote could occur in the
interior of the interval we're integrating over. Or, as in this example, it could occur
on the endpoint of that interval of integration. Now, it's possible that both of these situations
could occur for the same integral. And that's also an improper integral. This video will
focus on type one improper integrals. A type one improper integral, asks us to integrate
over an infinite interval. To do this, we take the integral over larger and larger finite
intervals and take the limit. So for example, to find the integral from one to infinity
of one over x squared dx, we'll evaluate the integral from one to some finite number T,
and then take the limit as t goes off to infinity. In symbols, we can write the limit as t goes
to infinity of the integral from one to T of one over x squared dx. Since one over x
squared is the same thing as x to the minus two, we can integrate it to get negative x
to the minus one evaluated between one and T, and then take that limit or rewrite this
as negative one over x and evaluate on the bounds of integration. as t goes to infinity,
one over t goes to zero. So the limit just comes from this expression, which evaluates
to one. If we think of it, the integral is representing area, this is a little surprising.
Even though we're taking the area of an infinitely long region, the area still evaluates to a
finite number of one. In this situation, we say that the improper integral converges.
So in general, the improper integral from some finite number a to infinity of f of x
dx is defined as the limit as t goes to infinity of the integral from a to T of f of x dx.
We say that the integral converges if this limit exists as a finite number. And we say
that the integral diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative infinity, or if it doesn't
exist. Similarly, we evaluate the integral from negative infinity to some finite number
by taking bigger and bigger intervals that extend off to negative infinity. That is,
this integral is defined as the limit as the left endpoint t goes to negative infinity
of the integral from t to b of f of x dx. We say that this integral converges if the
limit exists as a finite number, and diverges otherwise. So to evaluate the integral from
negative infinity to negative one of one over x dx, we take the limit as t goes to negative
infinity of the integral from t to negative one of
one over x dx. Now the integral of one over x is ln of the absolute value of x, which
will need to integrate between t and negative one and take a limit. We evaluate here we
know that ln of the absolute value of negative one, that's ln of one which is zero. A graph
of ln is helpful for evaluating the rest of this expression. as t goes to negative infinity,
the absolute value of t is going to infinity. And so ln is also going to infinity. Therefore,
our limit is actually negative infinity, and so the integral diverges. In this video, we
evaluated improper integrals Which the interval that we're integrating over is infinite by
looking at the integrals over larger and larger, finite intervals and taking a limit. This
video is about type two improper integrals. These are integrals for which the interval
that we're integrating over is finite. But the function that we're integrating goes to
infinity on that interval. To integrate a type to improper integral like this one, or
this one, we integrate our function over a larger and larger sub intervals on which the
function is finite. And then we take a limit. So in this first picture, where the function
approaches infinity, as x goes to be from the left, we can call that moving endpoint
T. and evaluate the integral as the limit as that right endpoint t approaches B from
the left of the integral from a to T of f of x dx. The same definition works if f of
x is going to negative infinity instead of infinity. In the second picture here, we again
want to take a limit of integrals over sub intervals on which the function is finite.
So in symbols, that says that if f goes to infinity or negative infinity, as x goes to
a from the positive side, then the integral from a to b of f of x dx is going to be the
limit as t goes to a from the right of the integral from t to b of f of x dx. As an example,
let's find the area under the curve y equals x over the square root of x squared minus
one between the lines of x equals one and x equals two. That area can be described as
the integral from one to two of our function. But this is an improper integral, because
the function is going to infinity, as x goes to one from the right. So we'll evaluate it
by taking the limit as t goes to one from the right of the integral from t to two of
the function. I'll compute this integral using u substitution, where u is x squared minus
one, and d u is 2x dx. Since I see an x dx, in my integrand, here, I'll solve for x dx,
and I get x dx is equal to one half deal. I'm also going to change my bounds of integration,
when x is equal to t. That means u is equal to t squared minus one. And when x is equal
to two, u is two squared minus one, that's three. So I'll rewrite my integral x dx is
the same thing as one half d u, and my square root of x squared minus one becomes a square
root of u in the denominator. Rewrite again, by pulling the one half out of the integral
and rewriting the square root of u in the denominator as u to the negative one half.
Now I can integrate, I get two times you to the one half evaluated between three and t
squared minus one, my one half and two cancel, and I'll plug in my bounds of integration
here. Now, as t goes to one from the right, t squared is also going to one, so t squared
minus one is going to zero. of the integral from t to negative one of
one over x dx. Now the integral of one over x is ln of the absolute value of x, which
will need to integrate between t and negative one and take a limit. We evaluate here we
know that ln of the absolute value of negative one, that's ln of one which is zero. A graph
of ln is helpful for evaluating the rest of this expression. as t goes to negative infinity,
the absolute value of t is going to infinity. And so ln is also going to infinity. Therefore,
our limit is actually negative infinity, and so the integral diverges. In this video, we
evaluated improper integrals Which the interval that we're integrating over is infinite by
looking at the integrals over larger and larger, finite intervals and taking a limit. This
video is about type two improper integrals. These are integrals for which the interval
that we're integrating over is finite. But the function that we're integrating goes to
infinity on that interval. To integrate a type to improper integral like this one, or
this one, we integrate our function over a larger and larger sub intervals on which the
function is finite. And then we take a limit. So in this first picture, where the function
approaches infinity, as x goes to be from the left, we can call that moving endpoint
T. and evaluate the integral as the limit as that right endpoint t approaches B from
the left of the integral from a to T of f of x dx. The same definition works if f of
x is going to negative infinity instead of infinity. In the second picture here, we again
want to take a limit of integrals over sub intervals on which the function is finite.
So in symbols, that says that if f goes to infinity or negative infinity, as x goes to
a from the positive side, then the integral from a to b of f of x dx is going to be the
limit as t goes to a from the right of the integral from t to b of f of x dx. As an example,
let's find the area under the curve y equals x over the square root of x squared minus
one between the lines of x equals one and x equals two. That area can be described as
the integral from one to two of our function. But this is an improper integral, because
the function is going to infinity, as x goes to one from the right. So we'll evaluate it
by taking the limit as t goes to one from the right of the integral from t to two of
the function. I'll compute this integral using u substitution, where u is x squared minus
one, and d u is 2x dx. Since I see an x dx, in my integrand, here, I'll solve for x dx,
and I get x dx is equal to one half deal. I'm also going to change my bounds of integration,
when x is equal to t. That means u is equal to t squared minus one. And when x is equal
to two, u is two squared minus one, that's three. So I'll rewrite my integral x dx is
the same thing as one half d u, and my square root of x squared minus one becomes a square
root of u in the denominator. Rewrite again, by pulling the one half out of the integral
and rewriting the square root of u in the denominator as u to the negative one half.
Now I can integrate, I get two times you to the one half evaluated between three and t
squared minus one, my one half and two cancel, and I'll plug in my bounds of integration
here. Now, as t goes to one from the right, t squared is also going to one, so t squared
minus one is going to zero. Therefore, my limit is just three to the one
half, or square root of three. And that's the area underneath my curve. This video was
about type two improper integrals, and how to compute them as the limit of integrals
over larger and larger sub intervals on which the function is finite. Sometimes we don't
really care what the value of an improper integral is, we just want to know whether
it's finite or infinite, whether it converges or diverges. In this situation, the comparison
theorem can be very handy. The comparison theorem can allow us to determine if an integral
converges or diverges without actually having to evaluate the integral instead by comparing
it to the integral of a function that we know converges or diverges. So suppose that g of
x and f of x are both positive valued functions. They're both greater than zero for all x's
on the interval A B. And let's suppose also that g of x is less than f of x on that interval
a, b. here, A or B could be infinity or negative infinity. So in the picture, we'll call this
blue function, g of x, and the orange function, f of x. And let's consider the interval from
one to infinity, where g of x is less than f of x, and both of them are bigger than zero.
Now, if we already know that the integral of f of x on this interval converges to a
finite number, then g of x, which is less than f of x also has to converge to a finite
number. So if the integral of f of x converges, then g of x converges. If we turn this around,
we can say that if g of x diverges, so it doesn't converge to a finite number, then
f of x has to diverged also. So in the situation where the integral of the bigger function
converges, or the integral of the smaller function diverges, then we can make some conclusions
about the integral the other function, but you have to be a little careful about this.
Because if instead, the integral of the bigger function diverges, then we really can't make
any conclusions at all about the integral of the smaller function, it could also diverged
or it could be small enough to converge as similarly, if the integral of the smaller
function converges, then we really just don't know anything about the integral of the bigger
function, it could converge, or it could divert. Let's look at an example. Suppose we want
to find out if the integral from two to infinity of two plus sine x over square root of x dx
converges or diverges. Instead of trying to evaluate it, which could get tricky, because
of the sine x and the square root of x in here, I'm going to just try to compare it
to something that I know converges or diverges. The first thing that I notice is that sine
of x is bounded. It's always between one and negative one. And that means that the numerator
two plus sine x is always going to be in between three and one. Therefore, the function two
plus sine x over square root of x is going to be between three over square root of x
and one over square root of x. Here's the general idea of the picture. Now the comparison
theorem tells us that if our function is less than a function whose interval converges,
then the integral of our current function will converge. And if our function is greater
than a function whose integral diverges than the integral of our function will diverged.
So which one of these two inequalities if we want to use depends on what happens to
the integral of these functions on the ends? Now we know that the integral of one over
the square root of x dx from two to infinity has to die verge. That's because this is a
p function, where p is equal to one half, which is less than one, the integral from
two to infinity of three over the square root of x dx also diverges since it's just three
times the other integral. So if we want to compare our function to a function whose integral
diverges, it It better be bigger than that divergent integral in order to get any useful
information out of it being less than a function whose integral diverges doesn't tell us anything.
So we need to focus on this inequality. Therefore, my limit is just three to the one
half, or square root of three. And that's the area underneath my curve. This video was
about type two improper integrals, and how to compute them as the limit of integrals
over larger and larger sub intervals on which the function is finite. Sometimes we don't
really care what the value of an improper integral is, we just want to know whether
it's finite or infinite, whether it converges or diverges. In this situation, the comparison
theorem can be very handy. The comparison theorem can allow us to determine if an integral
converges or diverges without actually having to evaluate the integral instead by comparing
it to the integral of a function that we know converges or diverges. So suppose that g of
x and f of x are both positive valued functions. They're both greater than zero for all x's
on the interval A B. And let's suppose also that g of x is less than f of x on that interval
a, b. here, A or B could be infinity or negative infinity. So in the picture, we'll call this
blue function, g of x, and the orange function, f of x. And let's consider the interval from
one to infinity, where g of x is less than f of x, and both of them are bigger than zero.
Now, if we already know that the integral of f of x on this interval converges to a
finite number, then g of x, which is less than f of x also has to converge to a finite
number. So if the integral of f of x converges, then g of x converges. If we turn this around,
we can say that if g of x diverges, so it doesn't converge to a finite number, then
f of x has to diverged also. So in the situation where the integral of the bigger function
converges, or the integral of the smaller function diverges, then we can make some conclusions
about the integral the other function, but you have to be a little careful about this.
Because if instead, the integral of the bigger function diverges, then we really can't make
any conclusions at all about the integral of the smaller function, it could also diverged
or it could be small enough to converge as similarly, if the integral of the smaller
function converges, then we really just don't know anything about the integral of the bigger
function, it could converge, or it could divert. Let's look at an example. Suppose we want
to find out if the integral from two to infinity of two plus sine x over square root of x dx
converges or diverges. Instead of trying to evaluate it, which could get tricky, because
of the sine x and the square root of x in here, I'm going to just try to compare it
to something that I know converges or diverges. The first thing that I notice is that sine
of x is bounded. It's always between one and negative one. And that means that the numerator
two plus sine x is always going to be in between three and one. Therefore, the function two
plus sine x over square root of x is going to be between three over square root of x
and one over square root of x. Here's the general idea of the picture. Now the comparison
theorem tells us that if our function is less than a function whose interval converges,
then the integral of our current function will converge. And if our function is greater
than a function whose integral diverges than the integral of our function will diverged.
So which one of these two inequalities if we want to use depends on what happens to
the integral of these functions on the ends? Now we know that the integral of one over
the square root of x dx from two to infinity has to die verge. That's because this is a
p function, where p is equal to one half, which is less than one, the integral from
two to infinity of three over the square root of x dx also diverges since it's just three
times the other integral. So if we want to compare our function to a function whose integral
diverges, it It better be bigger than that divergent integral in order to get any useful
information out of it being less than a function whose integral diverges doesn't tell us anything.
So we need to focus on this inequality. And now we can say that, since the integral
from two to infinity of one over the square root of x dx diverges by the P test, the integral
of our function also diverges by the comparison test. In this video, we saw that if we have
two positive functions, and one function is always less than or equal to the other function
on an interval, then if the smaller functions integral diverges, the bigger functions integral
also has to diverge. And if the Biggers functions integral converges, the smaller functions
integral also has to converge. That's the comparison there. In this video, I'll give
some definitions and notation for sequences. A sequence is a list of numbers in a particular
order, the sequence 314159 and So on is a sequence that gives the digits of pi. A sequence
is sometimes described abstractly, with letters in place of numbers, a sub one, a sub two,
a sub three, and so on. Or more concisely, by writing a sub n with these curly brackets.
Here, we're told that the index n ranges from one all the way up towards infinity. Sometimes
the sequence is written just a sub n with curly brackets. Here, it's implied that n
ranges through all positive integers. For these sequences, given by formulas, let's
write out the first few terms. We start with n equals one, and we get a sub one is three
times one plus one over one plus two factorial. That is, for over three factorial. Recall
that three factorial means that we start with three and then multiply with consecutive numbers
all the way down to one, this simplifies to four, six, or two thirds. To find the next
term, a sub two, we plug in two for add, that's seven over four factorial, which is 720 fourths.
Similarly, a sub three is 10, over five factorial, which is 10 over 120, or 112. So the first
three terms of the sequence are two thirds, 720, fourths, and 112. For the second example,
we're asked to start with K equals two. So I'll call the first term, a sub two, and just
plug in two for K, which is five ninths. Since negative one squared is positive one. Plugging
in K equals three, we get negative 6/27, or to negative two nights. For as of four, we
again get a positive number, since negative one to the fourth is positive. And in fact,
as we keep writing down terms, they're going to alternate between negative numbers and
positive numbers, because of the negative one to the K in the definition. Sometimes,
the nth term of a sequence is defined indirectly, in terms of previous terms. This is called
a recursive formula. To write out the first few terms of this recursive sequence, we're
told that a sub one equals two, to find a sub two, we just use the recursive formula
for minus one over a sub one. Since a sub one is two, that's four minus a half, or seven
half, defined a sub three, we just apply the recursive formula again, four minus one over
seven has simplifies to 26/7. Sometimes as possible, describe a sequence with either
a recursive formula, or a closed form non recursive formula. For example, if I look
at the sequence 246 810, I can describe that recursively by saying a sub one is two, and
each a sub n is equal to a sub n minus one plus two. Or I can describe as a closed form
expression by saying the sequence is of the form two times n, where n starts at one. And now we can say that, since the integral
from two to infinity of one over the square root of x dx diverges by the P test, the integral
of our function also diverges by the comparison test. In this video, we saw that if we have
two positive functions, and one function is always less than or equal to the other function
on an interval, then if the smaller functions integral diverges, the bigger functions integral
also has to diverge. And if the Biggers functions integral converges, the smaller functions
integral also has to converge. That's the comparison there. In this video, I'll give
some definitions and notation for sequences. A sequence is a list of numbers in a particular
order, the sequence 314159 and So on is a sequence that gives the digits of pi. A sequence
is sometimes described abstractly, with letters in place of numbers, a sub one, a sub two,
a sub three, and so on. Or more concisely, by writing a sub n with these curly brackets.
Here, we're told that the index n ranges from one all the way up towards infinity. Sometimes
the sequence is written just a sub n with curly brackets. Here, it's implied that n
ranges through all positive integers. For these sequences, given by formulas, let's
write out the first few terms. We start with n equals one, and we get a sub one is three
times one plus one over one plus two factorial. That is, for over three factorial. Recall
that three factorial means that we start with three and then multiply with consecutive numbers
all the way down to one, this simplifies to four, six, or two thirds. To find the next
term, a sub two, we plug in two for add, that's seven over four factorial, which is 720 fourths.
Similarly, a sub three is 10, over five factorial, which is 10 over 120, or 112. So the first
three terms of the sequence are two thirds, 720, fourths, and 112. For the second example,
we're asked to start with K equals two. So I'll call the first term, a sub two, and just
plug in two for K, which is five ninths. Since negative one squared is positive one. Plugging
in K equals three, we get negative 6/27, or to negative two nights. For as of four, we
again get a positive number, since negative one to the fourth is positive. And in fact,
as we keep writing down terms, they're going to alternate between negative numbers and
positive numbers, because of the negative one to the K in the definition. Sometimes,
the nth term of a sequence is defined indirectly, in terms of previous terms. This is called
a recursive formula. To write out the first few terms of this recursive sequence, we're
told that a sub one equals two, to find a sub two, we just use the recursive formula
for minus one over a sub one. Since a sub one is two, that's four minus a half, or seven
half, defined a sub three, we just apply the recursive formula again, four minus one over
seven has simplifies to 26/7. Sometimes as possible, describe a sequence with either
a recursive formula, or a closed form non recursive formula. For example, if I look
at the sequence 246 810, I can describe that recursively by saying a sub one is two, and
each a sub n is equal to a sub n minus one plus two. Or I can describe as a closed form
expression by saying the sequence is of the form two times n, where n starts at one. Now let's practice writing out a formula for
the general term, a sub n of a sequence. For this first sequence, notice that each term
is three more than the previous term. So this is like a linear function with slope three,
each time that n goes up by one, our ace events go up by three. And so I can write a sub n
is three times n plus b, where B functions like my y intercept and a linear equation,
to find B, I can plug in seven, four, a sub one that corresponds to an N value of one,
and I get that B has to equal four. So my general formula is three times n plus four,
where n starts at one. I can check this by plugging in a few values of n, like we did
in the previous example, just to make sure it works. Notice that it would also be possible
to write this as three times n plus seven If we're willing to start with n equals zero
instead of one, if we let n start with zero, then our first term functions like our y intercept.
This is an example of an arithmetic sequence, a sequence for which consecutive terms have
the same common difference. And in general, if A is the first term, and d is the common
difference than an arithmetic sequence has the form d times k plus a, if our index is
K and starts at zero, like it did over here. Or if we'd rather start with an index of one,
we can rewrite that as D times n minus one plus a. Notice these two expressions are exactly
the same, if we just set k equal to n minus one, in particular, the starting value of
n equals one here, if I plug in one for n, I get the equivalent starting value of K to
be zero. Let's read some more formulas for sequences. In this first sequence, notice
that consecutive terms always have the same ratio of 1/10. In other words, each time n
increases by one, a sub n gets multiplied by 1/10. This is the same property that exponential
functions have. And in fact, we can write a sub n in the form of an exponential function
with base 1/10. But we need to multiply by the right initial value, so that when n is
one, we'll get a first term of three, that correct initial value is 30. As usual, we
can check our answer by plugging in a few values of n, n equals 123. And making sure
we get back the terms in our sequence. If we prefer to start with our index at zero,
we can rewrite this as three times 1/10 to the nth power. Since a value of zero for n
in this formula, gives us three, just like a value of one for n in this formula gives
us three. In the second example, we again have a common ratio, if I divide the second
term by the first term, I get a ratio of five halves. And that's the same ratio as I get
when I divide the third term by the second term. So if I use an index starting with zero,
I can write this series as 15 halves, which is the first term times five halves to the
nth power. If I prefer to start with my index at one, one way to do this is to let K equal
n plus one and making a variable substitution. When n is 0k, will be one. And since K is
n plus one, n is k minus one, so I can replace n with k minus one. This gives the following
representation of the sequence. The third example has a common ratio of negative two
thirds. so we can write it as the initial term of three times that ratio, negative two
thirds raised to the nth power, where n starts at zero. Or, as above, we can write it as
three times negative two thirds to the k minus one. Now let's practice writing out a formula for
the general term, a sub n of a sequence. For this first sequence, notice that each term
is three more than the previous term. So this is like a linear function with slope three,
each time that n goes up by one, our ace events go up by three. And so I can write a sub n
is three times n plus b, where B functions like my y intercept and a linear equation,
to find B, I can plug in seven, four, a sub one that corresponds to an N value of one,
and I get that B has to equal four. So my general formula is three times n plus four,
where n starts at one. I can check this by plugging in a few values of n, like we did
in the previous example, just to make sure it works. Notice that it would also be possible
to write this as three times n plus seven If we're willing to start with n equals zero
instead of one, if we let n start with zero, then our first term functions like our y intercept.
This is an example of an arithmetic sequence, a sequence for which consecutive terms have
the same common difference. And in general, if A is the first term, and d is the common
difference than an arithmetic sequence has the form d times k plus a, if our index is
K and starts at zero, like it did over here. Or if we'd rather start with an index of one,
we can rewrite that as D times n minus one plus a. Notice these two expressions are exactly
the same, if we just set k equal to n minus one, in particular, the starting value of
n equals one here, if I plug in one for n, I get the equivalent starting value of K to
be zero. Let's read some more formulas for sequences. In this first sequence, notice
that consecutive terms always have the same ratio of 1/10. In other words, each time n
increases by one, a sub n gets multiplied by 1/10. This is the same property that exponential
functions have. And in fact, we can write a sub n in the form of an exponential function
with base 1/10. But we need to multiply by the right initial value, so that when n is
one, we'll get a first term of three, that correct initial value is 30. As usual, we
can check our answer by plugging in a few values of n, n equals 123. And making sure
we get back the terms in our sequence. If we prefer to start with our index at zero,
we can rewrite this as three times 1/10 to the nth power. Since a value of zero for n
in this formula, gives us three, just like a value of one for n in this formula gives
us three. In the second example, we again have a common ratio, if I divide the second
term by the first term, I get a ratio of five halves. And that's the same ratio as I get
when I divide the third term by the second term. So if I use an index starting with zero,
I can write this series as 15 halves, which is the first term times five halves to the
nth power. If I prefer to start with my index at one, one way to do this is to let K equal
n plus one and making a variable substitution. When n is 0k, will be one. And since K is
n plus one, n is k minus one, so I can replace n with k minus one. This gives the following
representation of the sequence. The third example has a common ratio of negative two
thirds. so we can write it as the initial term of three times that ratio, negative two
thirds raised to the nth power, where n starts at zero. Or, as above, we can write it as
three times negative two thirds to the k minus one. Where k starts at one. Sometimes people like
to write the negative one separately. The negative one to the power makes a series alternate
between negative and positive terms. These three sequences are all examples of geometric
sequences, which are key sequences where consecutive terms have the same common ratio. And in general,
if A is the first term and RS, the common ratio than a geometric sequence can be written
in the form of a times r to the n, where n starts at zero, or as a times r to the n minus
one, where n starts at one. These next two sequences are neither arithmetic sequences
nor geometric sequences. Since they're terms neither have common differences nor common
ratios, but I can still figure out a formula for the nth term just by looking for the pattern.
In this example, since the terms are alternating, if I start at n equals one, I know that 90
to negative one to the nth power to make it start with a negative and then alternate,
positive, negative Again, the numerator looks like it's just twice n. And the denominator
looks like it's always a perfect square, starting with the square of three, so I'll write that
as n plus two squared. The next sequence doesn't have a simple closed form formula, but I can
describe it recursively by saying that a one is negative six, a two is five. And in general,
a n is equal to the sum of the two previous terms, a sub n minus one, plus a sub n minus
two. This sequence is closely related to the standard Fibonacci sequence, which has the
same recursive formula, but different initial values. This video gave an introduction to
sequences, including arithmetic sequences, geometric sequences, and recursively defined
sequences. This video introduces the idea of a series and how to find it sum. For any
sequence, a sub n for n equals one to infinity, the sum of its terms, a sub one plus a sub
two plus a sub three, and so on, it's called a series. Often this series is written in
sigma notation, as a sum from n equals one to infinity of a sub n. Let's look at the
sequence one over two to the n for n equals one to infinity. If we add together all the
terms, we get the series, the sum from n equals one to infinity of one over two to the N,
that is the sum of one over two to the one, that's one half, plus one over two squared,
that's 1/4, plus one over two cubed 1/8 plus 1/16, plus 1/32, and so on. But what does
it really mean to add have infinitely many numbers? How can we figure out what this infinite
song equals? Well, the start out, we could add up finitely, many at a time, may write
down the first half dozen or so terms, that is the ace of ends. And I'll keep adding more
and more of them together one more at a time. But just add the first term, well, that's
just one half. Now add the next term on, that gives me a song of three fourths. If I add
1/8 to that, my son goes up to seven eights. And then I'll add the next one. I get 15 sixteenths,
and so on just adding one more term each time. This process of repeated addition gives me
a new sequence down at the bottom. That's called the sequence of partial sums. And it's
usually denoted by s sub n. So the first term in the sequence of partial sums as S sub one,
just adding together the first term, here's the second partial sum S sub two, adding together
the first two terms. So three means add together, the first three terms, and so on. Let me contrast
the sequence of partial sums with the sequence of terms that we started out with. Those are
denoted a sub n. So here's a sub one, the first term, a sub two, the second term, and
so on. Where k starts at one. Sometimes people like
to write the negative one separately. The negative one to the power makes a series alternate
between negative and positive terms. These three sequences are all examples of geometric
sequences, which are key sequences where consecutive terms have the same common ratio. And in general,
if A is the first term and RS, the common ratio than a geometric sequence can be written
in the form of a times r to the n, where n starts at zero, or as a times r to the n minus
one, where n starts at one. These next two sequences are neither arithmetic sequences
nor geometric sequences. Since they're terms neither have common differences nor common
ratios, but I can still figure out a formula for the nth term just by looking for the pattern.
In this example, since the terms are alternating, if I start at n equals one, I know that 90
to negative one to the nth power to make it start with a negative and then alternate,
positive, negative Again, the numerator looks like it's just twice n. And the denominator
looks like it's always a perfect square, starting with the square of three, so I'll write that
as n plus two squared. The next sequence doesn't have a simple closed form formula, but I can
describe it recursively by saying that a one is negative six, a two is five. And in general,
a n is equal to the sum of the two previous terms, a sub n minus one, plus a sub n minus
two. This sequence is closely related to the standard Fibonacci sequence, which has the
same recursive formula, but different initial values. This video gave an introduction to
sequences, including arithmetic sequences, geometric sequences, and recursively defined
sequences. This video introduces the idea of a series and how to find it sum. For any
sequence, a sub n for n equals one to infinity, the sum of its terms, a sub one plus a sub
two plus a sub three, and so on, it's called a series. Often this series is written in
sigma notation, as a sum from n equals one to infinity of a sub n. Let's look at the
sequence one over two to the n for n equals one to infinity. If we add together all the
terms, we get the series, the sum from n equals one to infinity of one over two to the N,
that is the sum of one over two to the one, that's one half, plus one over two squared,
that's 1/4, plus one over two cubed 1/8 plus 1/16, plus 1/32, and 
so on. But what does it really mean to add have infinitely many numbers? How can we figure
out what this infinite song equals? Well, the start out, we could add up finitely, many
at a time, may write down the first half dozen or so terms, that is the ace of ends. And
I'll keep adding more and more of them together one more at a time. But just add the first
term, well, that's just one half. Now add the next term on, that gives me a song of
three fourths. If I add 1/8 to that, my son goes up to seven eights. And then I'll add
the next one. I get 15 sixteenths, and so on just adding one more term each time. This
process of repeated addition gives me a new sequence down at the bottom. That's called
the sequence of partial sums. And it's usually denoted by s sub n. So the first term in the
sequence of partial sums as S sub one, just adding together the first term, here's the
second partial sum S sub two, adding together the first two terms. So three means add together,
the first three terms, and so on. Let me contrast the sequence of partial sums with the sequence
of terms that we started out with. Those are denoted a sub n. So here's a sub one, the
first term, a sub two, the second term, and so on. Although I can't physically add up infinitely
many numbers, I can observe that as I add up more and more numbers, my partial sums
are approaching the number one. That is the limit, as the number of terms I add up and
goes to infinity of the nth partial sum is equal to one. So it makes sense that if I
could add up all infinitely many numbers, I should get an exact sum of one, the sum
of this infinite series is one. In fact, for this particular series, there's a nice way
to see that the sum is one using geometry. If I draw a square with side length one and
fill in half of the square, that gives me an area of one half. Now if I draw a line
here, that gives me an additional area of 1/4. Here's an area of 1/8 1/16 and I keep
spiraling in here. I keep adding areas that exactly match the terms of this series. In
the limit, I'll have filled in the entire R square, which has an area of one. In this
example, which found the sum of the series by evaluating the limit of the partial sums.
And in general, this is how we find the sum of any series. For any series, the partial
sums of the series are defined as the sequence s sub n, where S sub one is equal to just
the first term, a sub one, a sub two is equal to the sum of the first two terms is a one
plus a sub two, a sub three is a sum of the first three terms. And in general, s sub n
is the sum of the first n terms. I can also write this in sigma notation, as the sum of
say, k equals one to n of a sub k. I'm using a different letter K here as the index, just
because I'm already using n to represent the number of terms that I'm adding up. That sum
of a sub n is said to converge if this sequence of partial sums converges as a sequence. That
is, if the limit as n goes to infinity of the sub ends, exists as a finite number. Otherwise,
if the limit does not exist, or the limit is infinity or negative infinity, then the
series is said to diverged. I want to emphasize that we're talking about the limit of the
partial sums here, not the limit of the original terms as a bad, it's important to keep in
mind when you're working with series that for any series, they're actually two sequences
of interest. There's the sequence of terms, the ace of ends. And then there's the sequence
of partial sums, the S events, it's the sequence of partial sums is telling us what the sum
of our series is. So if the sequence of partial sums converges to a number L, then we say
the cert series converges to L. Or in other words, the sum of the series is out. Let's
look at the series The sum of one over n squared plus n, please pause the video and take a
moment to write out the first four terms and the first four partial sums. The first four
terms are a sub one, a sub two, a sub three and a sub four. So plugging in one for n,
one over one squared plus one, so that's one half, a sub two is one over two squared plus
two, that's one six, Ace of three ends up being 1/12. And a sub four is 1/20. Now S
sub one is the sum of the first one terms, that's the same as a sub one is just one half Although I can't physically add up infinitely
many numbers, I can observe that as I add up more and more numbers, my partial sums
are approaching the number one. That is the limit, as the number of terms I add up and
goes to infinity of the nth partial sum is equal to one. So it makes sense that if I
could add up all infinitely many numbers, I should get an exact sum of one, the sum
of this infinite series is one. In fact, for this particular series, there's a nice way
to see that the sum is one using geometry. If I draw a square with side length one and
fill in half of the square, that gives me an area of one half. Now if I draw a line
here, that gives me an additional area of 1/4. Here's an area of 1/8 1/16 and I keep
spiraling in here. I keep adding areas that exactly match the terms of this series. In
the limit, I'll have filled in the entire R square, which has an area of one. In this
example, which found the sum of the series by evaluating the limit of the partial sums.
And in general, this is how we find the sum of any series. For any series, the partial
sums of the series are defined as the sequence s sub n, where S sub one is equal to just
the first term, a sub one, a sub two is equal to the sum of the first two terms is a one
plus a sub two, a sub three is a sum of the first three terms. And in general, s sub n
is the sum of the first n terms. I can also write this in sigma notation, as the sum of
say, k equals one to n of a sub k. I'm using a different letter K here as the index, just
because I'm already using n to represent the number of terms that I'm adding up. That sum
of a sub n is said to converge if this sequence of partial sums converges as a sequence. That
is, if the limit as n goes to infinity of the sub ends, exists as a finite number. Otherwise,
if the limit does not exist, or the limit is infinity or negative infinity, then the
series is said to diverged. I want to emphasize that we're talking about the limit of the
partial sums here, not the limit of the original terms as a bad, it's important to keep in
mind when you're working with series that for any series, they're actually two sequences
of interest. There's the sequence of terms, the ace of ends. And then there's the sequence
of partial sums, the S events, it's the sequence of partial sums is telling us what the sum
of our series is. So if the sequence of partial sums converges to a number L, then we say
the cert series converges to L. Or in other words, the sum of the series is out. Let's
look at the series The sum of one over n squared plus n, please pause the video and take a
moment to write out the first four terms and the first four partial sums. The first four
terms are a sub one, a sub two, a sub three and a sub four. So plugging in one for n,
one over one squared plus one, so that's one half, a sub two is one over two squared plus
two, that's one six, Ace of three ends up being 1/12. And a sub four is 1/20. Now S
sub one is the sum of the first one terms, that's the same as a sub one is just one half S sub two, is what I get when I add one half
plus one six, that's four, six, or two thirds. To get a sub three, I need to add on the next
term, two thirds plus 112, is 912, or three fourths. And finally, as sub four, I need
to add on the next term, which gives me four fifths. There's a nice pattern going on with
the S events here. For the nth partial song, the numerator is just n, and the denominator
is just n plus one. So the limit as n goes to infinity of the partial sums, is the limit
as n goes to infinity of n over n plus one, which is just one. That means that the sum
of the infinite series is equal to one, by coincidence the same sound as in the previous
example. In this video, we saw that to find the sum of an infinite series, we have to
calculate the partial sums. If we add together more and more finitely many terms, our partial
sum will get close to our infinite sum. And in fact, the sum of our infinite sum is defined
as the limit as n goes to infinity of the partial sum. This video gives some more definitions
about sequences, including the definition of bounded and the definition of monotonic
sequence is bounded above if all of its terms are less than or equal to some number in other
Words, there's a number capital M, such that the term a sub n is less than or equal to
capital M, for all values of the index n. A sequence is bounded below if all of its
terms are greater than or equal to some number. In other words, there's a number lowercase
m, such that a sub n is greater than or equal to lowercase m, for all and we say that a
sequence is bounded if it's bounded both above and below. In other words, all of its terms
are trapped between two numbers. Please pause the video and decide which of these three
sequences are bounded. This first sequence is bounded above by three. Since all of its
terms are less than or equal to three, of course, we could have also used four as an
upper bound, or 100 is an upper bound, but three is the tightest upper bound that we
can use. It's also bounded below by zero, since all of the terms are positive. So we
say that this sequence is bounded. The second sequence is bounded below by one, but it's
not bounded above, since its terms will eventually grow past any potential bound. The third sequence
is bounded below and above. In fact, if we graph n on the x axis and a sub n on the y
axis, then our terms bounce around between positive and negative values. But since we're
always multiplying by negative two thirds to get from one term to the next, the oscillations
are dying down in magnitude. And in fact, the terms can never get above three or below
negative two. We say that a sequence is increasing if each term is less than the next term, that
is, a sub n is less than a sub n plus one for all n. sequences called non decreasing
if each term is less than or equal to the next term. So a sub n is less than or equal
to a sub n plus one for all n. Non decreasing is like increasing, it's just we allow equality
between 2/6 consecutive terms S sub two, is what I get when I add one half
plus one six, that's four, six, or two thirds. To get a sub three, I need to add on the next
term, two thirds plus 112, is 912, or three fourths. And finally, as sub four, I need
to add on the next term, which gives me four fifths. There's a nice pattern going on with
the S events here. For the nth partial song, the numerator is just n, and the denominator
is just n plus one. So the limit as n goes to infinity of the partial sums, is the limit
as n goes to infinity of n over n plus one, which is just one. That means that the sum
of the infinite series is equal to one, by coincidence the same sound as in the previous
example. In this video, we saw that to find the sum of an infinite series, we have to
calculate the partial sums. If we add together more and more finitely many terms, our partial
sum will get close to our infinite sum. And in fact, the sum of our infinite sum is defined
as the limit as n goes to infinity of the partial sum. This video gives some more definitions
about sequences, including the definition of bounded and the definition of monotonic
sequence is bounded above if all of its terms are less than or equal to some number in other
Words, there's a number capital M, such that the term a sub n is less than or equal to
capital M, for all values of the index n. A sequence is bounded below if all of its
terms are greater than or equal to some number. In other words, there's a number lowercase
m, such that a sub n is greater than or equal to lowercase m, for all and we say that a
sequence is bounded if it's bounded both above and below. In other words, all of its terms
are trapped between two numbers. Please pause the video and decide which of these three
sequences are bounded. This first sequence is bounded above by three. Since all of its
terms are less than or equal to three, of course, we could have also used four as an
upper bound, or 100 is an upper bound, but three is the tightest upper bound that we
can use. It's also bounded below by zero, since all of the terms are positive. So we
say that this sequence is bounded. The second sequence is bounded below by one, but it's
not bounded above, since its terms will eventually grow past any potential bound. The third sequence
is bounded below and above. In fact, if we graph n on the x axis and a sub n on the y
axis, then our terms bounce around between positive and negative values. But since we're
always multiplying by negative two thirds to get from one term to the next, the oscillations
are dying down in magnitude. And in fact, the terms can never get above three or below
negative two. We say that a sequence is increasing if each term is less than the next term, that
is, a sub n is less than a sub n plus one for all n. sequences called non decreasing
if each term is less than or equal to the next term. So a sub n is less than or equal
to a sub n plus one for all n. Non decreasing is like increasing, it's just we allow equality
between 2/6 consecutive terms a sequence is decreasing if each term is greater
than the next one. So a sub n is greater than a sub n plus one for all n. And a sequence
is not increasing, if a sub n is greater than or equal to a sub n plus one for all n. Again,
not increasing is like decreasing, but we allow for equality between consecutive terms.
If we were to graph and on the x axis and a sub n on the y axis, then increasing looks
like this just like an increasing function, whereas decreasing would go down non decreasing
would go up possibly with some flat patches and mnandi increasing would go down possibly
with some flat patches, notice that increasing is a stronger condition than non decreasing
since being strictly less than something is stronger than just being less than or equal
to it. For that reason. If a sequence is increasing, it is also non decreasing. And similarly,
if a sequence is decreasing, it is also not increasing. A sequence is called monotonic,
if it is either non decreasing or non increasing. Please pause the video and try to decide which
of the following sequences are monotonic. The first two sequences are monotonic. The
first one is monotonically. Non increasing, since we never increase when we go from one
term to the next. In fact, we could also say that it's monotonically decreasing. Since
we always go strictly down as we go from one term to the next, we never have equality between
terms. The second sequence is monotonically non decreasing. Since we never go down, as
we go from one term to the next, we either go up or stay at the same level. In this case,
however, we could not say that the sequence is monotonically increasing because of the
equality between some pairs of consecutive terms. The third sequence is not monotonic,
the numbers bounce around between positive and negative numbers, and therefore sometimes
we are decreasing while other times we're increasing. And the fourth sequence is not
monotonic, because of the first few terms. However, from the fifth term on the terms
are monotonically, non decreasing. And we could also say monotonically increasing. In
this video, we give definitions for bounded and monotonic sequences. We'll see later that
these definitions can be important for determining when a sequence converges. In class, we talked
briefly about the sequence n minus five over n squared, where n goes from one to infinity.
We want to know if the sequence is monotonic. And if it's bounded. If we compute the first
few terms, the sequence appears to be steadily increasing. But in this case, appearances
are deceiving. And a better way to decide whether it's monotonic is to use calculus
to decide if the associated function f of x equals x minus five over x squared, it is
increasing for x values bigger than one. So let me take the derivative. Using the quotient
rule and simplify, I get that f prime of x is equal to minus x squared plus 10x over
x to the fourth. And now I need to decide is F prime of X greater than zero for x bigger
than one, if so my function, and therefore my sequence will, will be increasing. To check
if f prime of x  is greater than zero, I'll first set f prime
of x equal to zero. So I'll set my ratio here equal to zero, which means my numerator needs
to be equal to zero. And if I factor that, I get that x equals zero, or x equals 10. a sequence is decreasing if each term is greater
than the next one. So a sub n is greater than a sub n plus one for all n. And a sequence
is not increasing, if a sub n is greater than or equal to a sub n plus one for all n. Again,
not increasing is like decreasing, but we allow for equality between consecutive terms.
If we were to graph and on the x axis and a sub n on the y axis, then increasing looks
like this just like an increasing function, whereas decreasing would go down non decreasing
would go up possibly with some flat patches and mnandi increasing would go down possibly
with some flat patches, notice that increasing is a stronger condition than non decreasing
since being strictly less than something is stronger than just being less than or equal
to it. For that reason. If a sequence is increasing, it is also non decreasing. And similarly,
if a sequence is decreasing, it is also not increasing. A sequence is called monotonic,
if it is either non decreasing or non increasing. Please pause the video and try to decide which
of the following sequences are monotonic. The first two sequences are monotonic. The
first one is monotonically. Non increasing, since we never increase when we go from one
term to the next. In fact, we could also say that it's monotonically decreasing. Since
we always go strictly down as we go from one term to the next, we never have equality between
terms. The second sequence is monotonically non decreasing. Since we never go down, as
we go from one term to the next, we either go up or stay at the same level. In this case,
however, we could not say that the sequence is monotonically increasing because of the
equality between some pairs of consecutive terms. The third sequence is not monotonic,
the numbers bounce around between positive and negative numbers, and therefore sometimes
we are decreasing while other times we're increasing. And the fourth sequence is not
monotonic, because of the first few terms. However, from the fifth term on the terms
are monotonically, non decreasing. And we could also say monotonically increasing. In
this video, we give definitions for bounded and monotonic sequences. We'll see later that
these definitions can be important for determining when a sequence converges. In class, we talked
briefly about the sequence n minus five over n squared, where n goes from one to infinity.
We want to know if the sequence is monotonic. And if it's bounded. If we compute the first
few terms, the sequence appears to be steadily increasing. But in this case, appearances
are deceiving. And a better way to decide whether it's monotonic is to use calculus
to decide if the associated function f of x equals x minus five over x squared, it is
increasing for x values bigger than one. So let me take the derivative. Using the quotient
rule and simplify, I get that f prime of x is equal to minus x squared plus 10x over
x to the fourth. And now I need to decide is F prime of X greater than zero for x bigger
than one, if so my function, and therefore my sequence will, will be increasing. To check
if f prime of x is greater than zero, I'll first set f prime of x equal to zero. So I'll
set my ratio here equal to zero, which means my numerator needs to be equal to zero. And
if I factor that, I get that x equals zero, or x equals 10. Now if I draw my number line, since f prime
is equal to zero at zero and 10, it'll be positive and negative in between these values.
And by plugging in values, like x equals negative one, one and 11, I can see that f prime is
negative for x less than zero, positive for x between zero and 10, and negative for x
bigger than 10. In particular, f increases when x increases from one to 10. And then
it decreases. And so the same thing is happening to our sequence. Therefore, the sequence is
not monotonic. We can also use calculus to check if the sequence is bounded. Our first
derivative test shows that our function f of x has a maximum at x equals 10. At least
that's the maximum for x values, ranging from one to infinity. And that's all that's relevant
for our sequence. Therefore, our sequence is bounded above by its value at 10, which
is 10 minus five over 10 squared, or 1/20. Now notice that our sequence and minus five
over n squared is always bigger than zero, for n bigger than five since the numerator
and denominator are both positive in this situation. And since there are only finitely,
many terms where n is less than five, we can just use the minimum of these terms and zero
as a lower bound. The smallest of the first four terms is negative four, which is less
than zero, so that negative four forms a lower bound. So the sequence is in fact bounded.
And somewhat surprisingly, the calculus ideas of derivative and maximum and minimum. In
the past, we've encountered limits, like the limit as x goes to two of x minus two over
x squared minus four. We can't evaluate this limit just by plugging In two for x, because
x minus two goes to zero, and x squared minus four goes to zero as x goes to two. This is
known as a zero over zero indeterminate form. It's called indeterminate because we can't
tell what the limits going to be just by the fact that the numerator goes to zero and the
denominator goes to zero. It depends on how fast the numerator and the denominator are
going to zero compared to each other. And the final limit of the quotient could be any
number at all, or it could be infinity, or it could not even exist. In the past, we've
been able to evaluate some limits in zero over zero indeterminate form by using algebraic
tricks to rewrite the quotients. In this video, we'll introduce lopatok rule, which is a very
powerful technique for evaluating limits and indeterminate forms. A limit of the form the
limit as x goes to a of f of x over g of x is called a zero over zero indeterminate form.
If the limit as x goes to a of f of x is equal to zero, and the limit as x goes to a of g
of x is equal to zero. A limit in this form is called an infinity over infinity indeterminate
form. If the limit as x goes to a of f of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity.
And the limit as x goes to a pub g of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity. We saw
an example of a zero over zero indeterminate form in the introductory slide. One example
of a infinity over infinity indeterminate form is the limit as x goes to infinity of
3x squared minus 2x plus seven divided by negative 2x squared plus 16. Notice that as
x goes to infinity, the numerator goes to infinity while the denominator goes to negative
infinity. In these definitions of indeterminate form, it's possible for a to be a negative
infinity or infinity, like it is in this example, but it doesn't have to be loopy. talls rule
can be applied when f and g are differentiable functions. And the derivative of g is nonzero
in some open interval around a except possibly in a Now if I draw my number line, since f prime
is equal to zero at zero and 10, it'll be positive and negative in between these values.
And by plugging in values, like x equals negative one, one and 11, I can see that f prime is
negative for x less than zero, positive for x between zero and 10, and negative for x
bigger than 10. In particular, f increases when x increases from one to 10. And then
it decreases. And so the same thing is happening to our sequence. Therefore, the sequence is
not monotonic. We can also use calculus to check if the sequence is bounded. Our first
derivative test shows that our function f of x has a maximum at x equals 10. At least
that's the maximum for x values, ranging from one to infinity. And that's all that's relevant
for our sequence. Therefore, our sequence is bounded above by its value at 10, which
is 10 minus five over 10 squared, or 1/20. Now notice that our sequence and minus five
over n squared is always bigger than zero, for n bigger than five since the numerator
and denominator are both positive in this situation. And since there are only finitely,
many terms where n is less than five, we can just use the minimum of these terms and zero
as a lower bound. The smallest of the first four terms is negative four, which is less
than zero, so that negative four forms a lower bound. So the sequence is in fact bounded.
And somewhat surprisingly, the calculus ideas of derivative and maximum and minimum. In
the past, we've encountered limits, like the limit as x goes to two of x minus two over
x squared minus four. We can't evaluate this limit just by plugging In two for x, because
x minus two goes to zero, and x squared minus four goes to zero as x goes to two. This is
known as a zero over zero indeterminate form. It's called indeterminate because we can't
tell what the limits going to be just by the fact that the numerator goes to zero and the
denominator goes to zero. It depends on how fast the numerator and the denominator are
going to zero compared to each other. And the final limit of the quotient could be any
number at all, or it could be infinity, or it could not even exist. In the past, we've
been able to evaluate some limits in zero over zero indeterminate form by using algebraic
tricks to rewrite the quotients. In this video, we'll introduce lopatok rule, which is a very
powerful technique for evaluating limits and indeterminate forms. A limit of the form the
limit as x goes to a of f of x over g of x is called a zero over zero indeterminate form.
If the limit as x goes to a of f of x is equal to zero, and the limit as x goes to a of g
of x is equal to zero. A limit in this form is called an infinity over infinity indeterminate
form. If the limit as x goes to a of f of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity.
And the limit as x goes to a pub g of x is equal to infinity or minus infinity. We saw
an example of a zero over zero indeterminate form in the introductory slide. One example
of a infinity over infinity indeterminate form is the limit as x goes to infinity of
3x squared minus 2x plus seven divided by negative 2x squared plus 16. Notice that as
x goes to infinity, the numerator goes to infinity while the denominator goes to negative
infinity. In these definitions of indeterminate form, it's possible for a to be a negative
infinity or infinity, like it is in this example, but it doesn't have to be loopy. talls rule
can be applied when f and g are differentiable functions. And the derivative of g is nonzero
in some open interval around a except possibly in a under these conditions, if the limit as x
goes to a of f of x over g of x is zero over zero or infinity over infinity indeterminate
form, then the limit as x goes to a of f of x over g of x is the same thing as the limit
as x goes to a of f prime of x over g prime of x, provided that the second limit exists,
or as plus or minus infinity. Let's look at loopy towers rule in action. In this example,
as x goes to infinity, the numerator x goes to infinity and the denominator three to the
x also goes to infinity. So we have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. So let's
try applying lopi tos rule, our original limit should equal the limit as x goes to infinity
of the derivative of the numerator, which is one divided by the derivative of the denominator,
which is ln of three times three to the x, provided that the second limit exists or as
infinity or negative infinity. In the second limit, the numerators just fixed at one. And
the nominator goes to infinity as x goes to infinity. Therefore, the second limit is just
zero. And so the original limit evaluates to zero as well. In this example, we have
a zero over zero indeterminate form, because as x goes to zero, sine of x and x, both go
to zero in the numerator, and sine of x cubed goes to zero in the denominator. So using
loopy tells rule, I'll try to evaluate instead, the limit I get by taking the derivative of
the numerator and the derivative of the denominator. The derivative of sine x minus x is cosine
of x minus one, and the derivative of sine x cubed is three times sine x squared times
cosine x using the chain rule. Now let me try to evaluate the limit again. As x goes
to zero, cosine of x goes to one, so the numerator here goes to zero. As x goes to zero, sine
of x goes to zero and cosine of x goes to one, so the denominator also goes to zero.
So I still have a zero over zero and determinant form. And I might as well try applying leptitox
rule again. But before I do, I want to point out that cosine of x is going to one. So the
cosine of x here really isn't affecting my limit. And in fact, I could rewrite my limit
of a product as a product of limits, where the second limit is just one and can be ignored
from here on out. Now apply lopatok rule on this first limit, which is a little bit easier
to take the derivatives. And so the derivative of the top is minus sine x. And the derivative
of the bottom is six times sine x times cosine x. Now let's try to evaluate again, as x goes
to zero, our numerator is going to zero and our denominator is also going to zero. But
hang on, we don't have to apply lobby towels rule again, because we can actually just simplify
our expression, the sine x on the top cancels with the sine x on the bottom. And we can
just rewrite our limit as the limit of negative one over six cosine of x, which evaluates
easily to negative one, six. In this example, I want to emphasize that it's a good idea
to simplify after each application of lopi talls rule. If you don't simplify, like we
did here, then you might be tempted to apply lopatok rule and additional time when you
don't need to, which might make the problem more complicated. Instead of simpler to solve
this video, we were able to evaluate zero over zero and infinity over infinity indeterminate
forms by replacing the limit of f of x over g of x with the limit of f prime of x over
g prime of x, provided that second limit exists. This trick is known as lopi tels rule. We've
seen that lopatok rule can be used to evaluate limits of the form zero over zero, or infinity
over infinity. In this video, we'll continue to use loopy towels rule to evaluate additional
indeterminate forms, like zero times infinity, infinity to the 00 to the zero, and one to
the infinity. under these conditions, if the limit as x
goes to a of f of x over g of x is zero over zero or infinity over infinity indeterminate
form, then the limit as x goes to a of f of x over g of x is the same thing as the limit
as x goes to a of f prime of x over g prime of x, provided that the second limit exists,
or as plus or minus infinity. Let's look at loopy towers rule in action. In this example,
as x goes to infinity, the numerator x goes to infinity and the denominator three to the
x also goes to infinity. So we have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. So let's
try applying lopi tos rule, our original limit should equal the limit as x goes to infinity
of the derivative of the numerator, which is one divided by the derivative of the denominator,
which is ln of three times three to the x, provided that the second limit exists or as
infinity or negative infinity. In the second limit, the numerators just fixed at one. And
the nominator goes to infinity as x goes to infinity. Therefore, the second limit is just
zero. And so the original limit evaluates to zero as well. In this example, we have
a zero over zero indeterminate form, because as x goes to zero, sine of x and x, both go
to zero in the numerator, and sine of x cubed goes to zero in the denominator. So using
loopy tells rule, I'll try to evaluate instead, the limit I get by taking the derivative of
the numerator and the derivative of the denominator. The derivative of sine x minus x is cosine
of x minus one, and the derivative of sine x cubed is three times sine x squared times
cosine x using the chain rule. Now let me try to evaluate the limit again. As x goes
to zero, cosine of x goes to one, so the numerator here goes to zero. As x goes to zero, sine
of x goes to zero and cosine of x goes to one, so the denominator also goes to zero.
So I still have a zero over zero and determinant form. And I might as well try applying leptitox
rule again. But before I do, I want to point out that cosine of x is going to one. So the
cosine of x here really isn't affecting my limit. And in fact, I could rewrite my limit
of a product as a product of limits, where the second limit is just one and can be ignored
from here on out. Now apply lopatok rule on this first limit, which is a little bit easier
to take the derivatives. And so the derivative of the top is minus sine x. And the derivative
of the bottom is six times sine x times cosine x. Now let's try to evaluate again, as x goes
to zero, our numerator is going to zero and our denominator is also going to zero. But
hang on, we don't have to apply lobby towels rule again, because we can actually just simplify
our expression, the sine x on the top cancels with the sine x on the bottom. And we can
just rewrite our limit as the limit of negative one over six cosine of x, which evaluates
easily to negative one, six. In this example, I want to emphasize that it's a good idea
to simplify after each application of lopi talls rule. If you don't simplify, like we
did here, then you might be tempted to apply lopatok rule and additional time when you
don't need to, which might make the problem more complicated. Instead of simpler to solve
this video, we were able to evaluate zero over zero and infinity over infinity indeterminate
forms by replacing the limit of f of x over g of x with the limit of f prime of x over
g prime of x, provided that second limit exists. This trick is known as lopi tels rule. We've
seen that lopatok rule can be used to evaluate limits of the form zero over zero, or infinity
over infinity. In this video, we'll continue to use loopy towels rule to evaluate additional
indeterminate forms, like zero times infinity, infinity to the 00 to the zero, and one to
the infinity. In this example, we want to evaluate the limit
of a product. Notice that as x goes to zero from the positive side, sine x goes to zero,
and ln x goes to negative infinity. Remember the graph of y equals ln x. So this is actually
a zero times infinity indeterminate form. Even though the second factor is going to
negative infinity, we still call it a zero times infinity and indeterminate form, you
can think of the Infinity here as standing for either positive or negative infinity.
It's indeterminate. Because as x goes to zero, the sine x factor is pulling the product towards
zero, while the ln x factor is pulling the product towards large negative numbers. And
it's hard to predict what the limit of the product will actually be. But the great thing
is, I can actually rewrite this product to look like an infinity over infinity and determinant
form, or a zero over zero and determinant form. Instead of sine x times ln x, I can
rewrite the limit as ln x divided by one over sine x. Now as x goes to zero, my numerator
is going to negative infinity. And since sine x is going to zero through positive numbers,
my denominator one over sine x is going to positive infinity. So I have an infinity over
infinity indeterminate form. Now, I could instead choose to leave the sine x in the
numerator, and instead, put a one over ln x in the denominator. If I do this, then as
x goes to zero through positive numbers, sine x goes to zero. And since ln x goes to negative
infinity, one over ln x goes to zero, and so I have a zero over zero indeterminate form.
Sometimes it can be difficult to decide which of these two ways to rewrite a product as
a quotient. One rule of thumb is to take the version that makes it easier to take the derivative
of the numerator and denominator. Another trick is just to try one of the ways and if
you get stuck, go back and try the other. I'm going to use the first method of rewriting
it because I recognize that one over sine x can be written as cosecant of x and I know
how to take the derivative of cosecant x using lopi towels rule On this infinity over infinity
indeterminate form, I can rewrite my limit as the limit of what I get when I take the
derivative of the numerator, that's one over x divided by the derivative of the denominator,
that's negative cosecant x cotangent x. As always, I want to simplify my expression before
going any further, I can rewrite my trig functions in the denominator in terms of sine and cosine.
cosecant x is one over sine x. and cotangent x is cosine of x over sine of x. Now flipping
and multiplying, I get the limit as x goes to zero plus of one over x times the sine
squared of x over negative cosine of x. In other words, the limit of negative sine squared
x over x cosine x, we know that cosine of x goes to one as x goes to zero. So I can
rewrite this as the limit of negative sine squared x over x times the limit of something
that goes to one. So I once again have a zero over zero and determinant form. And I can
apply lopatok rule yet again, taking the derivative of the top, I get negative two sine x, cosine
of x, and the derivative, the bottom is just one. Now I'm in a good position just to evaluate
the limit by plugging in zero for x in the numerator, I get negative two times zero times
one, the denominator is just one, so my final limit is zero. In this limit, we have a battle
of forces. As x is going to infinity, one over x is going to zero. So one plus one over
x is going to one, but the exponent x is going to infinity, it's hard to tell what's going
to happen here. If we had one, to any finite number, that would be one. But anything slightly
bigger than one, as we raise it to have bigger and bigger powers, we would expect to get
infinity. In this example, we want to evaluate the limit
of a product. Notice that as x goes to zero from the positive side, sine x goes to zero,
and ln x goes to negative infinity. Remember the graph of y equals ln x. So this is actually
a zero times infinity indeterminate form. Even though the second factor is going to
negative infinity, we still call it a zero times infinity and indeterminate form, you
can think of the Infinity here as standing for either positive or negative infinity.
It's indeterminate. Because as x goes to zero, the sine x factor is pulling the product towards
zero, while the ln x factor is pulling the product towards large negative numbers. And
it's hard to predict what the limit of the product will actually be. But the great thing
is, I can actually rewrite this product to look like an infinity over infinity and determinant
form, or a zero over zero and determinant form. Instead of sine x times ln x, I can
rewrite the limit as ln x divided by one over sine x. Now as x goes to zero, my numerator
is going to negative infinity. And since sine x is going to zero through positive numbers,
my denominator one over sine x is going to positive infinity. So I have an infinity over
infinity indeterminate form. Now, I could instead choose to leave the sine x in the
numerator, and instead, put a one over ln x in the denominator. If I do this, then as
x goes to zero through positive numbers, sine x goes to zero. And since ln x goes to negative
infinity, one over ln x goes to zero, and so I have a zero over zero indeterminate form.
Sometimes it can be difficult to decide which of these two ways to rewrite a product as
a quotient. One rule of thumb is to take the version that makes it easier to take the derivative
of the numerator and denominator. Another trick is just to try one of the ways and if
you get stuck, go back and try the other. I'm going to use the first method of rewriting
it because I recognize that one over sine x can be written as cosecant of x and I know
how to take the derivative of cosecant x using lopi towels rule On this infinity over infinity
indeterminate form, I can rewrite my limit as the limit of what I get when I take the
derivative of the numerator, that's one over x divided by the derivative of the denominator,
that's negative cosecant x cotangent x. As always, I want to simplify my expression before
going any further, I can rewrite my trig functions in the denominator in terms of sine and cosine.
cosecant x is one over sine x. and cotangent x is cosine of x over sine of x. Now flipping
and multiplying, I get the limit as x goes to zero plus of one over x times the sine
squared of x over negative cosine of x. In other words, the limit of negative sine squared
x over x cosine x, we know that cosine of x goes to one as x goes to zero. So I can
rewrite this as the limit of negative sine squared x over x times the limit of something
that goes to one. So I once again have a zero over zero and determinant form. And I can
apply lopatok rule yet again, taking the derivative of the top, I get negative two sine x, cosine
of x, and the derivative, the bottom is just one. Now I'm in a good position just to evaluate
the limit by plugging in zero for x in the numerator, I get negative two times zero times
one, the denominator is just one, so my final limit is zero. In this limit, we have a battle
of forces. As x is going to infinity, one over x is going to zero. So one plus one over
x is going to one, but the exponent x is going to infinity, it's hard to tell what's going
to happen here. If we had one, to any finite number, that would be one. But anything slightly
bigger than one, as we raise it to have bigger and bigger powers, we would expect to get
infinity. So our limit has an independent permanent
form, it's hard to tell whether the answer is going to be one infinity, or maybe something
in between. Whenever I see an expression with a variable in the base, and a variable in
the exponent, I'm tempted to use logarithms. If we set y equal to one plus one over x to
the x, then if I take the natural log of both sides, I can use my log roles to rewrite that
by multiplying by x in the front. Now, if I wanted to take the limit as x goes to infinity
of ln y, that would be the limit of this product, x times ln one plus one over x. As x goes
to infinity, the first factor x goes to infinity. One plus one over x goes to just one and ln
one is going to zero. So we have infinity times zero indeterminate form, which we can
try to rewrite as an infinity over infinity, or a zero over zero indeterminate form. Let's
rewrite this as the limit of ln one plus one over x divided by one of our x. This is indeed
a zero over zero indeterminate form. So we can use lobi tiles rule and take the derivative
of the top and the bottom. The derivative of the top is one over one plus one over x
times the derivative of the inside, which would be negative one over x squared. And
the derivative on the bottom, the derivative one over x is negative one over x squared,
we can actually cancel out these two factors, and rewrite our limit as the limit as x goes
to infinity of one over one plus one over x, which is just equal to one since one over
x is going to zero. So we found that the limit of ln y is equal to one, but we're really
interested in finding the limit of y which we can think of as e to the ln y. Since ln
y is going to one, e to the ln y must be going to e to the one. In other words, E. So we
found that our original limit is equal to E. And in fact, you may recognize that this
limit is one of the ways of defining E. So our limit has an independent permanent
form, it's hard to tell whether the answer is going to be one infinity, or maybe something
in between. Whenever I see an expression with a variable in the base, and a variable in
the exponent, I'm tempted to use logarithms. If we set y equal to one plus one over x to
the x, then if I take the natural log of both sides, I can use my log roles to rewrite that
by multiplying by x in the front. Now, if I wanted to take the limit as x goes to infinity
of ln y, that would be the limit of this product, x times ln one plus one over x. As x goes
to infinity, the first factor x goes to infinity. One plus one over x goes to just one and ln
one is going to zero. So we have infinity times zero indeterminate form, which we can
try to rewrite as an infinity over infinity, or a zero over zero indeterminate form. Let's
rewrite this as the limit of ln one plus one over x divided by one of our x. This is indeed
a zero over zero indeterminate form. So we can use lobi tiles rule and take the derivative
of the top and the bottom. The derivative of the top is one over one plus one over x
times the derivative of the inside, which would be negative one over x squared. And
the derivative on the bottom, the derivative one over x is negative one over x squared,
we can actually cancel out these two factors, and rewrite our limit as the limit as x goes
to infinity of one over one plus one over x, which is just equal to one since one over
x is going to zero. So we found that the limit of ln y is equal to one, but we're really
interested in finding the limit of y which we can think of as e to the ln y. Since ln
y is going to one, e to the ln y must be going to e to the one. In other words, E. So we
found that our original limit is equal to E. And in fact, you may recognize that this
limit is one of the ways of defining E. In the previous example, we had a one to the
infinity and determinant form. And we took logs and used log rules to write that as an
infinity times zero indeterminate form. Well, the same thing can be done if we have an infinity
to the zero indeterminate form, or a zero to the zero and determinant form. So one to
the infinity, infinity to the zero, and zero to the zero are all indeterminate forms that
can be handled using lobi TAs role. In this video, we saw that a zero times infinity indeterminate
form could be converted to a zero over zero, or infinity over infinity indeterminate form
by rewriting f of x times g of x as f of x divided by one over g of x, or as g of x divided
by one over f of x. We also saw how to use lopi talls rule on these three sorts of indeterminate
forms by taking the ln of y, where y is our f of x to the g of x that we want to take
the limit of this video gives some tricks for deciding whether a sequence converges.
We say that a sequence a sub n converges, if the limit as n goes to infinity of the
terms, a sub n exists as a finite number. Otherwise, we say the sequence diverges. In
other words, a sequence diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative infinity, or does
not exist. More formally, we said the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equals L,
if for any small number epsilon, there's a number capital N, such that when the index
little n is bigger than or equal to capital N, a sub n is within distance epsilon of owl.
Saying that a sedan is within distance epsilon of L is the same thing as saying that the
absolute value of a sub n minus L is less than epsilon. Let me draw this as a picture.
If we put in on the x axis and a sub n on the y axis, we can plot our terms a sub n
like this, here, it looks like our a sub n are settling at a particular value, I'll draw
the value on the y axis and call it L. We say that the limit of a sub n is equal to
L. Because for any tiny number epsilon, here, I've tried to draw a distance epsilon above
L and a distance epsilon below, we can trap or a sub ends within epsilon of L by requiring
the index and to be big enough, for the epsilon I've chosen here, are a sub ends are trapped
within epsilon of L, when little n is bigger than equal to three. So there is that big
number n, which is here, like two or three, such that when little n is bigger than that
the a sub n are always trapped within epsilon of L. And if I chosen a tinier epsilon, I
would just have to go a little bit farther out to make sure that my sequence was trapped
within epsilon of n about this is the epsilon definition of a limit. Formally, we say the
limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n is infinity. If for any big number, omega, there's
a number capital N, such that a sub n is bigger than capital N, for a little n bigger than
or equal to capital N. In other words, no matter how big an Omega I originally pick,
my terms a sub n are eventually true. Above omega. Let me draw a picture for this one
too. My terms here again, are drawn in red. And now if I pick a certain height omega,
eventually all my turns will be above omega. And if I pick a different, bigger value of
omega, my terms will still eventually be bigger than omega, I might just need to go further
out in my sequence. In the previous example, we had a one to the
infinity and determinant form. And we took logs and used log rules to write that as an
infinity times zero indeterminate form. Well, the same thing can be done if we have an infinity
to the zero indeterminate form, or a zero to the zero and determinant form. So one to
the infinity, infinity to the zero, and zero to the zero are all indeterminate forms that
can be handled using lobi TAs role. In this video, we saw that a zero times infinity indeterminate
form could be converted to a zero over zero, or infinity over infinity indeterminate form
by rewriting f of x times g of x as f of x divided by one over g of x, or as g of x divided
by one over f of x. We also saw how to use lopi talls rule on these three sorts of indeterminate
forms by taking the ln of y, where y is our f of x to the g of x that we want to take
the limit of this video gives some tricks for deciding whether a sequence converges.
We say that a sequence a sub n converges, if the limit as n goes to infinity of the
terms, a sub n exists as a finite number. Otherwise, we say the sequence diverges. In
other words, a sequence diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative infinity, or does
not exist. More formally, we said the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equals L,
if for any small number epsilon, there's a number capital N, such that when the index
little n is bigger than or equal to capital N, a sub n is within distance epsilon of owl.
Saying that a sedan is within distance epsilon of L is the same thing as saying that the
absolute value of a sub n minus L is less than epsilon. Let me draw this as a picture.
If we put in on the x axis and a sub n on the y axis, we can plot our terms a sub n
like this, here, it looks like our a sub n are settling at a particular value, I'll draw
the value on the y axis and call it L. We say that the limit of a sub n is equal to
L. Because for any tiny number epsilon, here, I've tried to draw a distance epsilon above
L and a distance epsilon below, we can trap or a sub ends within epsilon of L by requiring
the index and to be big enough, for the epsilon I've chosen here, are a sub ends are trapped
within epsilon of L, when little n is bigger than equal to three. So there is that big
number n, which is here, like two or three, such that when little n is bigger than that
the a sub n are always trapped within epsilon of L. And if I chosen a tinier epsilon, I
would just have to go a little bit farther out to make sure that my sequence was trapped
within epsilon of n about this is the epsilon definition of a limit. Formally, we say the
limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n is infinity. If for any big number, omega, there's
a number capital N, such that a sub n is bigger than capital N, for a little n bigger than
or equal to capital N. In other words, no matter how big an Omega I originally pick,
my terms a sub n are eventually true. Above omega. Let me draw a picture for this one
too. My terms here again, are drawn in red. And now if I pick a certain height omega,
eventually all my turns will be above omega. And if I pick a different, bigger value of
omega, my terms will still eventually be bigger than omega, I might just need to go further
out in my sequence. For this first value of omega, I would just
need to pick a capital N of about 123456. Once my little ends are all bigger than six,
my Ace events are bigger than that omega, and for this bigger value of omega, I need
to pick a value of capital N of about nine, once my little ends are bigger than about
nine, all my as events would be bigger than this omega. There's a similar definition for
the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equaling negative infinity. Now we just need
to say that for any big negative number, omega, there's a number. And such that a sub n is
less than omega for a little n bigger than or equal to capital N. Please take a moment
and try to come up with an example of a sequence that converges, a sequence that diverges to
infinity or negative infinity, and a sequence that's bounded but still diverges. One example
of a convergent sequence is a sequence whenever n, this sequence converges to zero, since
the limit as n goes to infinity of one over N is zero. A divergent sequence is two to
the N. Since the limit as n goes to infinity of two to the n is infinity. One example of
a sequence that's bounded, but still diverges is negative one to the n. The sequence alternates
between negative one and one, depending on whether n is odd, or even. So it's bounded
in between negative one and one. But it still diverges because the limit does not exist.
Since the sequence doesn't settle at a single value. The rest of this video will give some
techniques for proving that sequences converge. The first technique is to use standard calculus
tricks for finding limits of functions. Even though a sequence is only defined on positive
integers. Sometimes it's possible to find a function defined on all positive real numbers
that agrees with our sequence on the integers. In other words, the terms as of n are equal
to f of n for this function F. When this happens, then if the limit as x goes to infinity of
f of x equals L, then the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n also equals out, the
red dots are converging to the same limit as the blue function. So a lot of times, we
can figure out if a sequence converges by replacing the terms a sub n with F of X for
some appropriate function, and then using lobaton ruler, other tricks from calculus
one to show that the function limit exists. Let's try that for the following example.
When the indices are missing, as in this example, we'll assume that n starts at one and goes
to infinity. In order to prove that this sequence converges, let's instead look at the function
f of x equals ln one plus two e to the x over x, where x is a real number. Now let's look
at the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x. That's the limit as x goes to infinity
of ln one plus two e to the x over x. And as x goes to infinity in the x goes to infinity,
so one plus two times e to the x goes to infinity, which means ln of that goes to infinity. So
the numerator is going to infinity as x goes to infinity. And so as the denominator, we
have an infinity over an infinity indeterminate form. So we can apply lobby towels rule and
take the derivative of the numerator over the derivative of the denominator, the derivative
of the numerator one over one plus two times e to the x times two times e to the x using
the chain rule, and the derivative of the denominator is just one. We can take derivatives
here, because we're thinking of x as a real number, not just an integer. Simplifying,
we still have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. So let's take the derivatives again, For this first value of omega, I would just
need to pick a capital N of about 123456. Once my little ends are all bigger than six,
my Ace events are bigger than that omega, and for this bigger value of omega, I need
to pick a value of capital N of about nine, once my little ends are bigger than about
nine, all my as events would be bigger than this omega. There's a similar definition for
the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equaling negative infinity. Now we just need
to say that for any big negative number, omega, there's a number. And such that a sub n is
less than omega for a little n bigger than or equal to capital N. Please take a moment
and try to come up with an example of a sequence that converges, a sequence that diverges to
infinity or negative infinity, and a sequence that's bounded but still diverges. One example
of a convergent sequence is a sequence whenever n, this sequence converges to zero, since
the limit as n goes to infinity of one over N is zero. A divergent sequence is two to
the N. Since the limit as n goes to infinity of two to the n is infinity. One example of
a sequence that's bounded, but still diverges is negative one to the n. The sequence alternates
between negative one and one, depending on whether n is odd, or even. So it's bounded
in between negative one and one. But it still diverges because the limit does not exist.
Since the sequence doesn't settle at a single value. The rest of this video will give some
techniques for proving that sequences converge. The first technique is to use standard calculus
tricks for finding limits of functions. Even though a sequence is only defined on positive
integers. Sometimes it's possible to find a function defined on all positive real numbers
that agrees with our sequence on the integers. In other words, the terms as of n are equal
to f of n for this function F. When this happens, then if the limit as x goes to infinity of
f of x equals L, then the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n also equals out, the
red dots are converging to the same limit as the blue function. So a lot of times, we
can figure out if a sequence converges by replacing the terms a sub n with F of X for
some appropriate function, and then using lobaton ruler, other tricks from calculus
one to show that the function limit exists. Let's try that for the following example.
When the indices are missing, as in this example, we'll assume that n starts at one and goes
to infinity. In order to prove that this sequence converges, let's instead look at the function
f of x equals ln one plus two e to the x over x, where x is a real number. Now let's look
at the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x. That's the limit as x goes to infinity
of ln one plus two e to the x over x. And as x goes to infinity in the x goes to infinity,
so one plus two times e to the x goes to infinity, which means ln of that goes to infinity. So
the numerator is going to infinity as x goes to infinity. And so as the denominator, we
have an infinity over an infinity indeterminate form. So we can apply lobby towels rule and
take the derivative of the numerator over the derivative of the denominator, the derivative
of the numerator one over one plus two times e to the x times two times e to the x using
the chain rule, and the derivative of the denominator is just one. We can take derivatives
here, because we're thinking of x as a real number, not just an integer. Simplifying,
we still have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form. So let's take the derivatives again, the derivative of the numerator is now two
times e to the x, and the derivative of the denominator is also two times e to the x.
So their limit here is one. Since our function converges to one, our sequence also converges
to one. So this original sequence converges to one. the derivative of the numerator is now two
times e to the x, and the derivative of the denominator is also two times e to the x.
So their limit here is one. Since our function converges to one, our sequence also converges
to one. So this original sequence converges to one. Another technique for proving that sequences
converge is to use the squeeze theorem and trap the sequence between two simpler sequences
that converge to the same limit. In this example, since sine and cosine are both bounded in
between one and negative one, we know that cosine of n plus sine of n can't be any bigger
than two, certainly, or on a smaller than negative two. If I divide all sides of this
inequality by n to the two thirds, we can see that the original sequence is bounded
in between negative two over n to the two thirds and two over n to the two thirds. Notice
that n to the two thirds has to be positive, since as usual, we're assuming that n starts
as one and goes to infinity. And so dividing by n to the two thirds does not switch the
inequality signs. Now it's easy to check that the limit as n goes to infinity of negative
two over n to the two thirds is zero, since as n goes to infinity, and to the two thirds
also goes to infinity. Similarly, the limit as n goes to infinity of two over n to the
two thirds is zero. Since these two limits are the same, we know by the squeeze theorem,
that the limit of our sequence in the middle has to exist at equals zero. Also, it's a
remarkable fact that I won't prove here that if a sub n is bounded, and monotonic, then
it has to converge. You might get some intuition for this fact, by looking at a graph. If the
ace of ends are monotonically, increasing, for example, but are bounded, then there's
no place for these events to go. And they can't oscillate up and down. Because they're
monotonically increasing. So it makes intuitive sense that they have to settle on some limit.
A fun example of this fact is a sequence that starts point 1.1 2.12 3.1234, and so on. Where
we just keep stringing together the counting numbers as our decimal, the sequence is certainly
monotonically increasing, and is bounded. Since every term of the sequence is greater
than zero and less than, say, point five. So we have a bounded monotonic sequence. And
so the sequence has to converge. Now, what it actually converges to is a little mysterious,
since it doesn't converge to some number we're already familiar with like, like, point six,
or pi over three or something like that. But it does converge to some real number. And
that real number is called champion nouns constant. And it has some interesting properties.
And of course, it has a decimal expansion that's easy to to come up with, since you
get it just by stringing together the counting numbers. If you can recognize a sequence to
be a geometric sequence, then it's pretty easy to decide whether it converges or diverges.
Recall that a geometric sequence is a sequence of the form a times r to the n minus one where
n runs from one to infinity. Or sometimes it's written as a times r to the n, where
n runs from zero to infinity. Let's try to figure out for what values of our the sequence
r to the n converges. It's not really important here whether and starts at zero or starts
So one, since when we talk about convergence, we're talking about the behavior of the terms
as n goes to infinity. So the first few terms really don't matter. if r is greater than
one, then the sequence r to the n is an increasing sequence. In fact, for the sequence r to the
n, if we replace n with x, and look at the function f of x equals r to the x, that's
an exponential function. And if we're assuming r is greater than one, the base for our exponential
functions is greater than one. So we know that the limit as x goes to infinity of our
to the X is infinity, which means that our sequence r to the n also has to diverge to
infinity. Another technique for proving that sequences
converge is to use the squeeze theorem and trap the sequence between two simpler sequences
that converge to the same limit. In this example, since sine and cosine are both bounded in
between one and negative one, we know that cosine of n plus sine of n can't be any bigger
than two, certainly, or on a smaller than negative two. If I divide all sides of this
inequality by n to the two thirds, we can see that the original sequence is bounded
in between negative two over n to the two thirds and two over n to the two thirds. Notice
that n to the two thirds has to be positive, since as usual, we're assuming that n starts
as one and goes to infinity. And so dividing by n to the two thirds does not switch the
inequality signs. Now it's easy to check that the limit as n goes to infinity of negative
two over n to the two thirds is zero, since as n goes to infinity, and to the two thirds
also goes to infinity. Similarly, the limit as n goes to infinity of two over n to the
two thirds is zero. Since these two limits are the same, we know by the squeeze theorem,
that the limit of our sequence in the middle has to exist at equals zero. Also, it's a
remarkable fact that I won't prove here that if a sub n is bounded, and monotonic, then
it has to converge. You might get some intuition for this fact, by looking at a graph. If the
ace of ends are monotonically, increasing, for example, but are bounded, then there's
no place for these events to go. And they can't oscillate up and down. Because they're
monotonically increasing. So it makes intuitive sense that they have to settle on some limit.
A fun example of this fact is a sequence that starts point 1.1 2.12 3.1234, and so on. Where
we just keep stringing together the counting numbers as our decimal, the sequence is certainly
monotonically increasing, and is bounded. Since every term of the sequence is greater
than zero and less than, say, point five. So we have a bounded monotonic sequence. And
so the sequence has to converge. Now, what it actually converges to is a little mysterious,
since it doesn't converge to some number we're already familiar with like, like, point six,
or pi over three or something like that. But it does converge to some real number. And
that real number is called champion nouns constant. And it has some interesting properties.
And of course, it has a decimal expansion that's easy to to come up with, since you
get it just by stringing together the counting numbers. If you can recognize a sequence to
be a geometric sequence, then it's pretty easy to decide whether it converges or diverges.
Recall that a geometric sequence is a sequence of the form a times r to the n minus one where
n runs from one to infinity. Or sometimes it's written as a times r to the n, where
n runs from zero to infinity. Let's try to figure out for what values of our the sequence
r to the n converges. It's not really important here whether and starts at zero or starts
So one, since when we talk about convergence, we're talking about the behavior of the terms
as n goes to infinity. So the first few terms really don't matter. if r is greater than
one, then the sequence r to the n is an increasing sequence. In fact, for the sequence r to the
n, if we replace n with x, and look at the function f of x equals r to the x, that's
an exponential function. And if we're assuming r is greater than one, the base for our exponential
functions is greater than one. So we know that the limit as x goes to infinity of our
to the X is infinity, which means that our sequence r to the n also has to diverge to
infinity. If instead, r is equal to one, then r to the
n is just one to the n, which is just a sequence of ones, so that converges to one. if r is
between zero and one, then r to the n, is decreasing. This time, it's like the exponential
function f of x equals r to the x with the base between zero and one. And so the limit
of that exponential function, as x goes to infinity is going to be equals zero. Therefore,
the sequence also converges to zero. Of course, if r equals exactly zero, and 
the sequence is just a sequence of zeros, so it also converges to zero. Next, let's
look at the case when r is between negative one and zero. Now, the sequence of rd ends
are going to oscillate between positive and negative numbers that get smaller and smaller
and magnitude as n goes to infinity. That's because we get from one number to the next
by multiplying by r, which is a negative number of magnitude less than one. So our limit as
n goes to infinity of our A to the ends, is going to be zero again. Another way of thinking
about this case, is by thinking about the squeeze theorem, since r to the n is always
less than or equal to the absolute value of r to the n, which is o n is always greater
than or equal to negative the absolute value of r to the n. Technically, r to the n is
always exactly equal to the absolute value are the n when n is even, so that art of the
N is positive. And it's always exactly equal to the negative of the absolute value of r,
the N, when n is odd, so that are the n is, is negative. But in any case, the inequality
still does technically hold. And so therefore, since by the squeeze theorem, the limit of
the left terms is zero, and the limit of the right terms is zero. As we noted before, the
limit of the middle term also has to be zero. So our sequence converges to zero. Now, if
r is equal to negative one, then our sequence r to the n is just negative one to the n,
which alternates between negative one and one. And so that sequence diverges. Finally,
if r is less than negative one, then to get from one term to the next, we're multiplying
by negative number that has magnitude bigger than one. And so our terms are going to oscillate
between positive and negative numbers, but they're going to be going up in magnitude.
And so the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n, does not exist. And we see that our
sequence diverges. If we look through all these cases, we see that the sequence r to
the n converges to zero, when r is between negative one and one. it converges to one
when r is exactly equal to one, and it diverges when r is bigger than one or less than negative
one. All right, then Summary below. In fact, almost the same thing as true, when we look
at the sequence a times r to the n, where A is any real number, the sequence a times
r to the n converges to zero, when r is between negative one and one. it converges to a, when
r is equal to one. And it diverges when r is less than negative one, or greater than
one. This follows because multiplying all the terms in the sequence by a just multiplies
the limit by a and zero times as zero, well, one times i is a. So anytime you encounter
a geometric sequence, that is a sequence that can be written in the form of a times r to
the n, If instead, r is equal to one, then r to the
n is just one to the n, which is just a sequence of ones, so that converges to one. if r is
between zero and one, then r to the n, is decreasing. This time, it's like the exponential
function f of x equals r to the x with the base between zero and one. And so the limit
of that exponential function, as x goes to infinity is going to be equals zero. Therefore,
the sequence also converges to zero. Of course, if r equals exactly zero, and the sequence
is just a sequence of zeros, so it also converges to zero. Next, let's look at the case when
r is between negative one and zero. Now, the sequence of rd ends are going to oscillate
between positive and negative numbers that get smaller and smaller and magnitude as n
goes to infinity. That's because we get from one number to the next by multiplying by r,
which is a negative number of magnitude less than one. So our limit as n goes to infinity
of our A to the ends, is going to be zero again. Another way of thinking about this
case, is by thinking about the squeeze theorem, since r to the n is always less than or equal
to the absolute value of r to the n, which is o n is always greater than or equal to
negative the absolute value of r to the n. Technically, r to the n is always exactly
equal to the absolute value are the n when n is even, so that art of the N is positive.
And it's always exactly equal to the negative of the absolute value of r, the N, when n
is odd, so that are the n is, is negative. But in any case, the inequality still does
technically hold. And so therefore, since by the squeeze theorem, the limit of the left
terms is zero, and the limit of the right terms is zero. As we noted before, the limit
of the middle term also has to be zero. So our sequence converges to zero. Now, if r
is equal to negative one, then our sequence r to the n is just negative one to the n,
which alternates between negative one and one. And so that sequence diverges. Finally,
if r is less than negative one, then to get from one term to the next, we're multiplying
by negative number that has magnitude bigger than one. And so our terms are going to oscillate
between positive and negative numbers, but they're going to be going up in magnitude.
And so the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n, does not exist. And we see that our
sequence diverges. If we look through all these cases, we see that the sequence r to
the n converges to zero, when r is between negative one and one. it converges to one
when r is exactly equal to one, and it diverges when r is bigger than one or less than negative
one. All right, then Summary below. In fact, almost the same thing as true, when we look
at the sequence a times r to the n, where A is any real number, the sequence a times
r to the n converges to zero, when r is between negative one and one. it converges to a, when
r is equal to one. And it diverges when r is less than negative one, or greater than
one. This follows because multiplying all the terms in the sequence by a just multiplies
the limit by a and zero times as zero, well, one times i is a. So anytime you encounter
a geometric sequence, that is a sequence that can be written in the form of a times r to
the n, you can know that it converges if r is bigger
than negative one and less than or equal to one. This sequence here, although it looks
really complicated, it's really a geometric sequence in disguise. One way to see this
is by simplifying the form of the terms, so this is negative one to the t, e to the t
times e to the minus one over three to the T times three squared. This is the same thing
as negative e over three to the T times one over three squared times E. Now this is looking
like the tail end of a geometric sequence, where A is one over three squared times E,
and R, the common ratio is minus e over three, say the tail end, because we have T starting
at three instead of zero. Now since he is less than three, the magnitude of our is got
to be smaller than one. In other words, our as a negative number, that's between negative
one and zero, and therefore, the tail end of 
this geometric sequence converges. It's kind of interesting to note that we could also
rewrite this geometric sequence if we wanted to, using an index and going from zero to
infinity. And one way to figure out how to do that the are the common ratio stays the
same as negative e over three. But since this version starts at t equals three, the first
term here is really minus e over three cubed times one over three squared E. And that becomes
our value of A. Notice that when n is zero here, I get this value. And when t is three,
here, I get the same value for this sequence. So these sequences are equivalent. But in
any case, for either a sequence, the common ratio, R is negative B over three, and a sequence
converges. Therefore, the final trick that I want to mention for deciding whether sequences
converge or diverge is limit laws, the usual limit laws about addition, subtraction, and
so on hold for sequences as well for functions. So for example, if the limit as n goes to
infinity of a sub n is out, and the limit of b sub n is am than the limit of the sum,
a sub n plus b sub n is going to be equal to L plus m. And the limit of a sub n times
b sub n is L times M. And the limit of C times a sub n where C is some constant is going
to be c times though similar roles holds for subtraction and division. I want to emphasize
that these limit holds hold under the condition that the limits of the component sequences
exist as finite numbers. I can use these limit laws to decide if this sequence converges,
since the limit of the terms is equal to the difference of the limits, provided those limits
exist. Now the first limit is zero, since the degree of the numerator is less than the
degree of the denominator here, and the second limit is also zero. Since this is a geometric
sequence, with ratio of four fifths, and four fifths is between zero and one. Therefore,
the limit of our original sequence must be zero. In this video, we saw several ways to
prove that a sequence converges. We saw that we could use calculus techniques like lopi
taas rule. After replacing the sequence with its associated function defined on real numbers,
we also saw that we could use the squeeze theorem. we noted that all sequences that
are bounded and monotonic must converge. And we saw that geometric sequences always converge
if r is bigger than negative one and less than or equal to one. Finally, we saw that
we can use limit laws to handle sums and products and other conglomerations of sequences. This
video is about geometric series, and when they converge, and when they diverged. you can know that it converges if r is bigger
than negative one and less than or equal to one. This sequence here, although it looks
really complicated, it's really a geometric sequence in disguise. One way to see this
is by simplifying the form of the terms, so this is negative one to the t, e to the t
times e to the minus one over three to the T times three squared. This is the same thing
as negative e over three to the T times one over three squared times E. Now this is looking
like the tail end of a geometric sequence, where A is one over three squared times E,
and R, the common ratio is minus e over three, say the tail end, because we have T starting
at three instead of zero. Now since he is less than three, the magnitude of our is got
to be smaller than one. In other words, our as a negative number, that's between negative
one and zero, and therefore, the tail end of this geometric sequence converges. It's
kind of interesting to note that we could also rewrite this geometric sequence if we
wanted to, using an index and going from zero to infinity. And one way to figure out how
to do that the are the common ratio stays the same as negative e over three. But since
this version starts at t equals three, the first term here is really minus e over three
cubed times one over three squared E. And that becomes our value of A. Notice that when
n is zero here, I get this value. And when t is three, here, I get the same value for
this sequence. So these sequences are equivalent. But in any case, for either a sequence, the
common ratio, R is negative B over three, and a sequence converges. Therefore, the final
trick that I want to mention for deciding whether sequences converge or diverge is limit
laws, the usual limit laws about addition, subtraction, and so on hold for sequences
as well for functions. So for example, if the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n
is out, and the limit of b sub n is am than the limit of the sum, a sub n plus b sub n
is going to be equal to L plus m. And the limit of a sub n times b sub n is L times
M. And the limit of C times a sub n where C is some constant is going to be c times
though similar roles holds for subtraction and division. I want to emphasize that these
limit holds hold under the condition that the limits of the component sequences exist
as finite numbers. I can use these limit laws to decide if this sequence converges, since
the limit of the terms is equal to the difference of the limits, provided those limits exist.
Now the first limit is zero, since the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of
the denominator here, and the second limit is also zero. Since this is a geometric sequence,
with ratio of four fifths, and four fifths is between zero and one. Therefore, the limit
of our original sequence must be zero. In this video, we saw several ways to prove that
a sequence converges. We saw that we could use calculus techniques like lopi taas rule.
After replacing the sequence with its associated function defined on real numbers, we also
saw that we could use the squeeze theorem. we noted that all sequences that are bounded
and monotonic must converge. And we saw that geometric sequences always converge if r is
bigger than negative one and less than or equal to one. Finally, we saw that we can
use limit laws to handle sums and products and other conglomerations of sequences. This
video is about geometric series, and when they converge, and when they diverged. A geometric sequence is a sequence of the
form a a times r, a times r squared, a times r cubed, and so on. For some numbers a and
r. this can be written in the wrapped up notation, a times r to the k, where k goes from zero
to infinity. For example, if a is three, and r is one half, the sequence would be three,
three halves, three fourths, three eighths, and so on, which could be written as three
times one half to the k, where k ranges from zero to infinity. A geometric series is the
series you get by adding all these numbers up. So that would be a plus a times r plus
a times r squared, and so on, which can be written in summation notation is the sum from
K equals zero to infinity of A times r to the K. For our example, our series would be
the following, which could be written as the sum from K equals zero to infinity of three
times one half to the K. Sometimes you might get a geometric series that's in disguise,
like this one. If I write out the first few terms, notice that we're told to start with
i equals two. So plugging in i equals two here, I get negative one, squared over three
to the two times two minus three, that's one over three. If I plug in i equals three, I
get negative one cubed, that's over three to the two times three minus three, or negative
one over three cubed, negative 127. When I go four, I get one over 243. If I look at
the ratio of consecutive terms, negative 127 divided by 1/3, is negative one night. Similarly,
the ratio here is also negative one nights, suggesting that we might have a geometric
series with ratio R of negative 1/9. And first term coming from here, of 1/3. But there's
another way to see this that's less arithmetic intensive, and makes use of exponent rules.
If we look at the basic term, and rewrite it using exponent rules, this is three to
the two i times three to the minus three, I can rewrite the three to the two is three
squared to the I and the three to the minus three and the denominator becomes a three
cubed and the numerator. Now I can group together all the pieces that are raised to the nth
power. And write this as negative 1/9 to the i times three cubed, or 27 times negative
one night to the I reading like this, I can see that every time I increases by one, I
get another factor of negative one nine multiplied in my expression. And therefore, the this
is a geometric series with ratio negative one nine, as I saw before, now, you might
think that the first term should be 27. But remember that it doesn't start at zero, it
starts at two. So the first term is going to be what I get I get when I plug in the
first value of i. So that's 27 times negative one nine squared, which works out to 1/3.
as before. So we do have a geometric series with first term of 1/3, a common ratio of
negative 1/9. In fact, we could rewrite it in a more standard form as the sum of 1/3
times negative 1/9 to the k, where k ranges from zero to infinity. Since k equals zero,
and this expression corresponds to i equals two in this expression, k is equal to, can
be thought of as equal to i minus two. And this is really a reindexing tugann simplification
to get from this version to this version. A geometric sequence is a sequence of the
form a a times r, a times r squared, a times r cubed, and so on. For some numbers a and
r. this can be written in the wrapped up notation, a times r to the k, where k goes from zero
to infinity. For example, if a is three, and r is one half, the sequence would be three,
three halves, three fourths, three eighths, and so on, which could be written as three
times one half to the k, where k ranges from zero to infinity. A geometric series is the
series you get by adding all these numbers up. So that would be a plus a times r plus
a times r squared, and so on, which can be written in summation notation is the sum from
K equals zero to infinity of A times r to the K. For our example, our series would be
the following, which could be written as the sum from K equals zero to infinity of three
times one half to the K. Sometimes you might get a geometric series that's in disguise,
like this one. If I write out the first few terms, notice that we're told to start with
i equals two. So plugging in i equals two here, I get negative one, squared over three
to the two times two minus three, that's one over three. If I plug in i equals three, I
get negative one cubed, that's over three to the two times three minus three, or negative
one over three cubed, negative 127. When I go four, I get one over 243. If I look at
the ratio of consecutive terms, negative 127 divided by 1/3, is negative one night. Similarly,
the ratio here is also negative one nights, suggesting that we might have a geometric
series with ratio R of negative 1/9. And first term coming from here, of 1/3. But there's
another way to see this that's less arithmetic intensive, and makes use of exponent rules.
If we look at the basic term, and rewrite it using exponent rules, this is three to
the two i times three to the minus three, I can rewrite the three to the two is three
squared to the I and the three to the minus three and the denominator becomes a three
cubed and the numerator. Now I can group together all the pieces that are raised to the nth
power. And write this as negative 1/9 to the i times three cubed, or 27 times negative
one night to the I reading like this, I can see that every time I increases by one, I
get another factor of negative one nine multiplied in my expression. And therefore, the this
is a geometric series with ratio negative one nine, as I saw before, now, you might
think that the first term should be 27. But remember that it doesn't start at zero, it
starts at two. So the first term is going to be what I get I get when I plug in the
first value of i. So that's 27 times negative one nine squared, which works out to 1/3.
as before. So we do have a geometric series with first term of 1/3, a common ratio of
negative 1/9. In fact, we could rewrite it in a more standard form as the sum of 1/3
times negative 1/9 to the k, where k ranges from zero to infinity. Since k equals zero,
and this expression corresponds to i equals two in this expression, k is equal to, can
be thought of as equal to i minus two. And this is really a reindexing tugann simplification
to get from this version to this version. As you may know, a geometric sequence converges
to zero, when the common ratio R is between negative one and one, it converges to a, when
r is equal to one, and it diverges. Otherwise, when r is less than or equal to negative one,
or when r is greater than one. We're assuming here, that A is not equal zero, since otherwise,
we'd have a very boring though convergent sequence of all zeros. I want to restate this
convergence criteria in limit form, since we'll use it later. But it's saying is that
when r is between negative one and one, the limit, as K goes to infinity of A times r
to the K is zero, that's what it means to converge to zero. when r is equal to one,
that limit is equal to A. And when r is less than or equal to negative one or greater than
one, that limit does not exist as a finite number. Now I'd like to find similar rules
in terms of r for when a geometric series converges or diverges. Again, we'll assume
that a is not equal to zero. Since otherwise, I just have a sum of a bunch of zeros, a boring
series that would converge to zero. Our strategy is going to be to find a formula for the nth
partial sum of the series, and then take the limit of partial sums. Since by definition,
that limit tells us whether the series converges or diverges. Before we carry out that strategy,
I want to consider one special case, when r is equal to one, then the series is just
a plus a plus a, and so that diverges to infinity if A is positive, or to negative infinity,
if a is negative, remember, we're assuming that A is not zero. so far is one our series
diverges. And from now on, we'll assume that R is not equal to one. Let's look at a few
partial sums. The first partial sum S sub one, just the first term A, S sub two is a
plus a times R, and so on. In general, the nth partial sum s sub n is a plus a times
r plus a times r squared. And I continue until let's see, the last term will be a times r
to the n minus one, the second last term will be a times r to the n minus two. Notice that
the nth partial sum only goes up to A times r to the n minus one. Since we're starting
at a which is a 10 to the zero. I'd like to write the partial sum in a nicer form, so
I don't have to write all those dots. And to do that, I'm going to use a trick, I'm
going to multiply both sides of this equation by R. So on the left, I get r times s sub
n. And on the right, I'm going to multiply each term by R. So the first term becomes
a times R, the second term A times r squared, a times r cubed, and so on, the second to
last term becomes a times r to the n minus one, and the last term becomes a times r to
the n. Notice that this equation, and the equation under it have a lot of terms in common,
they match up along the diagonals. So if I subtract the second equation from the first,
on the left side, I'm going to get s sub n minus r times s sub n. But on the right side,
a lot of my terms will cancel, this term will cancel the next one, this one cancels with
the previous one. And what I'm left with is just a minus a times r to the n, I get a minus
sign here, because I'm subtracting the whole equation. Now I can solve for a sub n, I can
factor it out. I'll factor out the A also just to keep things tidy. And then I get that
s sub n is a times one minus r to the n over one minus R. I don't have to worry about dividing
by one minus r that can't be zero, because remember, I'm assuming that R is not one.
Now that I have a nice tidy formula for s sub n, I can proceed to take the limit as
n goes to infinity and see if my sequence of partial sums converges or diverges sets
the limit of my formula. And notice that the only part of this formula that depends on
n is the art of the N, a one one minus are all constants as far as n is concerned. So
we can use limit rurals. To take those out of the limit, I can rewrite the limit as a
over one minus r times the limit of one minus r to the n or even better as a over one minus
r times one minus the limit of r to the n. Now this limit I've seen before, right on
this page, is the same as the limit I was considering when I was looking at convergence
of sequences, where I use the same R, and my A is equal to one. So we know that this
limit goes to zero, when r is between negative one and one, and does not exist as a finite
number. when r is less than or equal to negative one, or r is greater than one. Therefore,
the limit of the partial sums is going to equal a over one minus r times one minus zero,
which is just a over one minus r, when r is between negative one and one, and that limit,
will not exist as a finite number. when r is less than or equal to negative one, or
r is greater than one. Since the limit also doesn't exist as a finite number, when r is
one, I can add a little equality sign. And now I've got all this cases for our covered
me write this down as a conclusion. The geometric series converges to a over one minus R. As you may know, a geometric sequence converges
to zero, when the common ratio R is between negative one and one, it converges to a, when
r is equal to one, and it diverges. Otherwise, when r is less than or equal to negative one,
or when r is greater than one. We're assuming here, that A is not equal zero, since otherwise,
we'd have a very boring though convergent sequence of all zeros. I want to restate this
convergence criteria in limit form, since we'll use it later. But it's saying is that
when r is between negative one and one, the limit, as K goes to infinity of A times r
to the K is zero, that's what it means to converge to zero. when r is equal to one,
that limit is equal to A. And when r is less than or equal to negative one or greater than
one, that limit does not exist as a finite number. Now I'd like to find similar rules
in terms of r for when a geometric series converges or diverges. Again, we'll assume
that a is not equal to zero. Since otherwise, I just have a sum of a bunch of zeros, a boring
series that would converge to zero. Our strategy is going to be to find a formula for the nth
partial sum of the series, and then take the limit of partial sums. Since by definition,
that limit tells us whether the series converges or diverges. Before we carry out that strategy,
I want to consider one special case, when r is equal to one, then the series is just
a plus a plus a, and so that diverges to infinity if A is positive, or to negative infinity,
if a is negative, remember, we're assuming that A is not zero. so far is one our series
diverges. And from now on, we'll assume that R is not equal to one. Let's look at a few
partial sums. The first partial sum S sub one, just the first term A, S sub two is a
plus a times R, and so on. In general, the nth partial sum s sub n is a plus a times
r plus a times r squared. And I continue until let's see, the last term will be a times r
to the n minus one, the second last term will be a times r to the n minus two. Notice that
the nth partial sum only goes up to A times r to the n minus one. Since we're starting
at a which is a 10 to the zero. I'd like to write the partial sum in a nicer form, so
I don't have to write all those dots. And to do that, I'm going to use a trick, I'm
going to multiply both sides of this equation by R. So on the left, I get r times s sub
n. And on the right, I'm going to multiply each term by R. So the first term becomes
a times R, the second term A times r squared, a times r cubed, and so on, the second to
last term becomes a times r to the n minus one, and the last term becomes a times r to
the n. Notice that this equation, and the equation under it have a lot of terms in common,
they match up along the diagonals. So if I subtract the second equation from the first,
on the left side, I'm going to get s sub n minus r times s sub n. But on the right side,
a lot of my terms will cancel, this term will cancel the next one, this one cancels with
the previous one. And what I'm left with is just a minus a times r to the n, I get a minus
sign here, because I'm subtracting the whole equation. Now I can solve for a sub n, I can
factor it out. I'll factor out the A also just to keep things tidy. And then I get that
s sub n is a times one minus r to the n over one minus R. I don't have to worry about dividing
by one minus r that can't be zero, because remember, I'm assuming that R is not one.
Now that I have a nice tidy formula for s sub n, I can proceed to take the limit as
n goes to infinity and see if my sequence of partial sums converges or diverges sets
the limit of my formula. And notice that the only part of this formula that depends on
n is the art of the N, a one one minus are all constants as far as n is concerned. So
we can use limit rurals. To take those out of the limit, I can rewrite the limit as a
over one minus r times the limit of one minus r to the n or even better as a over one minus
r times one minus the limit of r to the n. Now this limit I've seen before, right on
this page, is the same as the limit I was considering when I was looking at convergence
of sequences, where I use the same R, and my A is equal to one. So we know that this
limit goes to zero, when r is between negative one and one, and does not exist as a finite
number. when r is less than or equal to negative one, or r is greater than one. Therefore,
the limit of the partial sums is going to equal a over one minus r times one minus zero,
which is just a over one minus r, when r is between negative one and one, and that limit,
will not exist as a finite number. when r is less than or equal to negative one, or
r is greater than one. Since the limit also doesn't exist as a finite number, when r is
one, I can add a little equality sign. And now I've got all this cases for our covered
me write this down as a conclusion. The geometric series converges to a over one minus R. For For r between negative one and one, I can also
say that's the absolute value of r less than one, and it diverges for the absolute value
of r greater than or equal to one. Let's use this fact in this example. Remember that we
decided that this was a geometric series with a common ratio r equal to negative one night,
and we found the first term a by plugging in i equals two, and I got that first term
of 1/3. Since the absolute value of our sales value of negative 1/9 is 1/9, which is less
than one, we know that the series converges, and it converges to a over one minus r, so
that's 1/3 over one minus negative one nights, which is 1/3 over one plus one night, that's
1/3 over 10 nights, which simplifies to three tenths. In this video, we looked at geometric
series, with first term a common ratio R, we saw that a geometric series will converge
if the absolute value of r is less than one. And they'll diverged if the absolute value
of r is greater than or equal to one. In the case that it converges, it converges to a
over one minus r, where A is the first term, and r is the common ratio. This video explains
how to determine whether a series converges or diverges using an integral. Let's start
with the series, the sum of one over n squared. Please pause the video for a moment and think
about why this might converge or diverge. The sum from n equals one to infinity of one
over n squared is closely related to the integral from one to infinity of one over x squared
dx. Let me show you what I mean. In this picture, I've graphed the function y equals one over
x squared in blue. in green, I've drawn a bunch of rectangles, I've divided the x axis
into sub intervals of length one, and so each rectangle has a base of length one, and a
height given by my functions value on the right endpoint of the sub interval. So the
first rectangle has a base of one and a height of one, so it has an area of one, the second
rectangle has a base of one and a height of one over two squared, so that's 1/4. So the
area here is 1/4. The next rectangle base of one again, and a height of 1/9, and so
on. The area of each rectangle is just the same as its height, and its height is just
given by one over n squared for the appropriate value of n In other words, if I write out
the first few terms of this series, it's exactly the same as the areas of my rectangles. And
the sum of my series is just going to be the total green area. Now my integral can also
be thought of in terms of area, this integral represents the area from one to infinity.
Under my blue curve, we know that this area is finite, because we know that this integral
converges by the P test where p is two. Now if I just look at the rectangles, starting
with the second rectangle on, all of those rectangles will lie below the blue curve,
and to the right of the line x equals one, so they will have a smaller area, and therefore
the area of these rectangles from the second one on has to converge to a finite number.
That is, the sum from n equals two to infinity of one over n squared converges. We're interested
in the sum from one to infinity. But that's just the area of this single rectangle plus
the area of all these rectangles with just one more than this sum here. So it also converges
to a finite number. To recap, the chain of logic goes like this. First, we solve the
integral represents a finite area, because of the P test. From that, we can conclude
that the sum from n equals two to infinity of one over n squared represents a smaller
and also finite area. And from that, we can figure out that the sum from n equals one
to infinity has to represent a finite area. So our series converges to a finite number.
Let's look at another example. The sum from n equals one to infinity of one over the square
root of n. r between negative one and one, I can also
say that's the absolute value of r less than one, and it diverges for the absolute value
of r greater than or equal to one. Let's use this fact in this example. Remember that we
decided that this was a geometric series with a common ratio r equal to negative one night,
and we found the first term a by plugging in i equals two, and I got that first term
of 1/3. Since the absolute value of our sales value of negative 1/9 is 1/9, which is less
than one, we know that the series converges, and it converges to a over one minus r, so
that's 1/3 over one minus negative one nights, which is 1/3 over one plus one night, that's
1/3 over 10 nights, which simplifies to three tenths. In this video, we looked at geometric
series, with first term a common ratio R, we saw that a geometric series will converge
if the absolute value of r is less than one. And they'll diverged if the absolute value
of r is greater than or equal to one. In the case that it converges, it converges to a
over one minus r, where A is the first term, and r is the common ratio. This video explains
how to determine whether a series converges or diverges using an integral. Let's start
with the series, the sum of one over n squared. Please pause the video for a moment and think
about why this might converge or diverge. The sum from n equals one to infinity of one
over n squared is closely related to the integral from one to infinity of one over x squared
dx. Let me show you what I mean. In this picture, I've graphed the function y equals one over
x squared in blue. in green, I've drawn a bunch of rectangles, I've divided the x axis
into sub intervals of length one, and so each rectangle has a base of length one, and a
height given by my functions value on the right endpoint of the sub interval. So the
first rectangle has a base of one and a height of one, so it has an area of one, the second
rectangle has a base of one and a height of one over two squared, so that's 1/4. So the
area here is 1/4. The next rectangle base of one again, and a height of 1/9, and so
on. The area of each rectangle is just the same as its height, and its height is just
given by one over n squared for the appropriate value of n In other words, if I write out
the first few terms of this series, it's exactly the same as the areas of my rectangles. And
the sum of my series is just going to be the total green area. Now my integral can also
be thought of in terms of area, this integral represents the area from one to infinity.
Under my blue curve, we know that this area is finite, because we know that this integral
converges by the P test where p is two. Now if I just look at the rectangles, starting
with the second rectangle on, all of those rectangles will lie below the blue curve,
and to the right of the line x equals one, so they will have a smaller area, and therefore
the area of these rectangles from the second one on has to converge to a finite number.
That is, the sum from n equals two to infinity of one over n squared converges. We're interested
in the sum from one to infinity. But that's just the area of this single rectangle plus
the area of all these rectangles with just one more than this sum here. So it also converges
to a finite number. To recap, the chain of logic goes like this. First, we solve the
integral represents a finite area, because of the P test. From that, we can conclude
that the sum from n equals two to infinity of one over n squared represents a smaller
and also finite area. And from that, we can figure out that the sum from n equals one
to infinity has to represent a finite area. So our series converges to a finite number.
Let's look at another example. The sum from n equals one to infinity of one over the square
root of n. Please pause the video for a moment and think
about how you might use an integral to decide if this series converges or diverges. A natural
integral to consider is the integral from one to infinity of one over the square root
of x dx. This integral diverges by the P test, where p is equal to one half, which is less
than one. Let's look at a picture to compare areas. The blue curve here is the graph of
the function y equals one over the square root of x. And here, once again, I've drawn
green rectangles using the right endpoints to get the heights of the rectangles. So the
areas of my rectangles are the same as the terms in my series. As in the previous problem,
if I ignore the first rectangle, then all the rest of the rectangles have an area that's
less than the area under my curve from one to infinity. But there's a serious problem
here, the integral from one to infinity of one over the square root of x dx diverges
to infinity, the area of my rectangles from the second one on might be less than my area
under the blue curve. But being less than something that diverges to infinity, it tells
us nothing, this series could converge or it could diverged. But don't give up hope.
If we just tweak this picture a little bit, we'll be able to get something that we can
use here. In this second picture, I've used left endpoints instead of right endpoints
for the heights of my rectangles. Because my function y equals one over the square root
of x is a decreasing function. Using left endpoints, makes my rectangles have a larger
area than the area under the corresponding section of the curve. let me label the rectangles
with their areas. The areas of these rectangles correspond to the terms in my series. But
now we have that the area of the green rectangles, that total area, that total area is bigger
than the integral from one to infinity of one over x squared of x dx. Please pause the video for a moment and think
about how you might use an integral to decide if this series converges or diverges. A natural
integral to consider is the integral from one to infinity of one over the square root
of x dx. This integral diverges by the P test, where p is equal to one half, which is less
than one. Let's look at a picture to compare areas. The blue curve here is the graph of
the function y equals one over the square root of x. And here, once again, I've drawn
green rectangles using the right endpoints to get the heights of the rectangles. So the
areas of my rectangles are the same as the terms in my series. As in the previous problem,
if I ignore the first rectangle, then all the rest of the rectangles have an area that's
less than the area under my curve from one to infinity. But there's a serious problem
here, the integral from one to infinity of one over the square root of x dx diverges
to infinity, the area of my rectangles from the second one on might be less than my area
under the blue curve. But being less than something that diverges to infinity, it tells
us nothing, this series could converge or it could diverged. But don't give up hope.
If we just tweak this picture a little bit, we'll be able to get something that we can
use here. In this second picture, I've used left endpoints instead of right endpoints
for the heights of my rectangles. Because my function y equals one over the square root
of x is a decreasing function. Using left endpoints, makes my rectangles have a larger
area than the area under the corresponding section of the curve. let me label the rectangles
with their areas. The areas of these rectangles correspond to the terms in my series. But
now we have that the area of the green rectangles, that total area, that total area is bigger
than the integral from one to infinity of one over x squared of x dx. Since this integral diverges, and this series
is larger, it must diverged also. This method of comparing a series to an integral is a
very general method for showing convergence. It's known as the interval test. The integral
test says that if f is a continuous positive and decreasing function on the interval from
one to infinity, and our terms a sub n are equal to f evaluated at n, then if the integral
from one to infinity of f of x dx converges, the series from one to infinity of a sub n
converges. And if the integral from one to infinity of f of x dx diverges, then the series
diverges. Although I won't give a formal proof of this theorem, the logic behind is the same
logic we used in the previous two examples. If the interval converges, we use the picture
here, using write endpoints to draw rectangles. The area of each rectangle is the same as
its height, since the rectangle has base one, and the height of each rectangle is just f
sub n. So the area of the first rectangle is just f sub one, which is a sub one, the
area the second rectangle is F sub two, which is a sub two, and so on. If we focus on the
second rectangle onwards, then the combined area of those rectangles is less than the
area represented by the integral. So we can say the sum from n equals two to infinity
of a sub n is less than or equal to the integral. So the integral converges by assumption, this
series here has to converge, and therefore, our original series from n equals one to infinity
must also converge. If instead, our integral diverges, then we use the other picture, and
we use left endpoints for our rectangles, the areas of the rectangles are still given
by a sub one, a sub two, and so on. But this time, the combined area of the green rectangles,
that area is now greater than or equal to the integral of our function. Since this integral
diverges, the larger area must diverged as well. That's the idea behind the integral
test. And to apply it, we just need to be able to integrate the function that corresponds
to our terms, and check that that function is continuous, positive and decreasing. Actually,
it's enough to check that the function is eventually continuous, positive and decreasing.
By eventually I mean that it has these properties on some interval from R to infinity for some
number R. This is good enough, because then I can always draw the same pictures, just
starting with R instead of one in my picture, and get the integral converges if and only
if the series starting at our converges by the same arguments we use before, but the
series starting at our converges if and only if the series starting at one converges, since
adding on Finally, many extra terms to my series doesn't affect whether it converges
or not. And the integral from R to infinity converges if and only if the integral from
one to infinity converges, because similarly, adding on a finite little piece of area from
one to R, doesn't change the convergent status of the integral. So by this chain of logic,
it's okay if our function starts out increasing for a while, as long as it's eventually positive,
continuous and decreasing. Here's an example of the integral test and action. We want to
know if the sum from n equals one to infinity of ln n over n, converges or diverges. So
let's look instead at the integral from one to infinity of ln of x Since this integral diverges, and this series
is larger, it must diverged also. This method of comparing a series to an integral is a
very general method for showing convergence. It's known as the interval test. The integral
test says that if f is a continuous positive and decreasing function on the interval from
one to infinity, and our terms a sub n are equal to f evaluated at n, then if the integral
from one to infinity of f of x dx converges, the series from one to infinity of a sub n
converges. And if the integral from one to infinity of f of x dx diverges, then the series
diverges. Although I won't give a formal proof of this theorem, the logic behind is the same
logic we used in the previous two examples. If the interval converges, we use the picture
here, using write endpoints to draw rectangles. The area of each rectangle is the same as
its height, since the rectangle has base one, and the height of each rectangle is just f
sub n. So the area of the first rectangle is just f sub one, which is a sub one, the
area the second rectangle is F sub two, which is a sub two, and so on. If we focus on the
second rectangle onwards, then the combined area of those rectangles is less than the
area represented by the integral. So we can say the sum from n equals two to infinity
of a sub n is less than or equal to the integral. So the integral converges by assumption, this
series here has to converge, and therefore, our original series from n equals one to infinity
must also converge. If instead, our integral diverges, then we use the other picture, and
we use left endpoints for our rectangles, the areas of the rectangles are still given
by a sub one, a sub two, and so on. But this time, the combined area of the green rectangles,
that area is now greater than or equal to the integral of our function. Since this integral
diverges, the larger area must diverged as well. That's the idea behind the integral
test. And to apply it, we just need to be able to integrate the function that corresponds
to our terms, and check that that function is continuous, positive and decreasing. Actually,
it's enough to check that the function is eventually continuous, positive and decreasing.
By eventually I mean that it has these properties on some interval from R to infinity for some
number R. This is good enough, because then I can always draw the same pictures, just
starting with R instead of one in my picture, and get the integral converges if and only
if the series starting at our converges by the same arguments we use before, but the
series starting at our converges if and only if the series starting at one converges, since
adding on Finally, many extra terms to my series doesn't affect whether it converges
or not. And the integral from R to infinity converges if and only if the integral from
one to infinity converges, because similarly, adding on a finite little piece of area from
one to R, doesn't change the convergent status of the integral. So by this chain of logic,
it's okay if our function starts out increasing for a while, as long as it's eventually positive,
continuous and decreasing. Here's an example of the integral test and action. We want to
know if the sum from n equals one to infinity of ln n over n, converges or diverges. So
let's look instead at the integral from one to infinity of ln of x over x. over x. This is a continuous function, because it's
the quotient of two continuous functions, and we're starting at an x value of one, so
we don't have to worry about the denominator being zero. It's also a positive function.
Since we know that ln of x is greater than zero for x bigger than one, and therefore
this quotient is greater than This is a continuous function, because it's
the quotient of two continuous functions, and we're starting at an x value of one, so
we don't have to worry about the denominator being zero. It's also a positive function.
Since we know that ln of x is greater than zero for x bigger than one, and therefore
this quotient is greater than zero also. zero also. Finally, let's check if our function is decreasing.
One way to do that is to look at the derivative. If f of x is ln x over x, then f prime of
x by the quotient rule is x times one over x minus ln x times one over x squared. This
simplifies to one minus ln x over x squared, which is negative when one minus ln x is less
than zero, that is one is less than our an x, that is E is less than x. So the function
has a negative derivative and is decreasing whenever x is bigger than E, so it's eventually
decreasing the three conditions Finally, let's check if our function is decreasing.
One way to do that is to look at the derivative. If f of x is ln x over x, then f prime of
x by the quotient rule is x times one over x minus ln x times one over x squared. This
simplifies to one minus ln x over x squared, which is negative when one minus ln x is less
than zero, that is one is less than our an x, that is E is less than x. So the function
has a negative derivative and is decreasing whenever x is bigger than E, so it's eventually
decreasing the three conditions They're met, so we can apply the integral
test. Next, we need to figure out if this integral converges or diverges. This is an improper integral. So by definition,
it's the limit as t goes to infinity of the integral from one to T of ln x over x. We
can use use of the tuition to evaluate it, where u is equal to ln x, d u is equal to
one over x dx. And when x is equal to one, u is equal to ln of one, that's zero, when
x is equal to t, u is equal to ln of t. Substituting in, we get the integral from zero to ln T
of you do this integrates to use squared over two evaluated between ln T and zero. Substituting in our bounds of integration,
we get the limit as t goes to infinity of ln t squared over two minus zero. Now as t
goes to infinity, ln of T also goes to infinity. So ln t squared over two goes to infinity,
therefore, the integral diverges. And so by the integral test, the series also diverges.
In this video, we saw that a series converges if and only if the corresponding integral
converges, provided that the corresponding function is eventually continuous, positive
and decreasing. In this video, we'll determine whether series converge or diverge by comparing
them to more familiar series. Suppose that the sum of a sub n and the sum of b sub n
are series. And suppose that the terms of the series are always greater than or equal
to zero, and that a sub n is less than or equal to b sub n for all n. In the pictures
below, the heights of the blue bars are supposed to represent the ACE events, and the heights
of the green bars are supposed to represent the base events. If we put the pictures together,
we see that the heights of the blue bars are less than the heights of the green bars. So
we have the inequality, zero is less than or equal to a sub n is less than or equal
to b sub n. Since the base of each bar has length one, the height of each bar is the
same number as its area. So when we write the sum from n equals one to infinity, of
a sub n, this represents the area of all the blue rectangles added up the total blue area.
And when we write sum from n equals one to infinity of b sub n, this represents the area
of all the green rectangles, the total green area. Because the blue bars have a smaller
area than the green bars, we can make some conclusions. First of all, if the total green
area is finite, then so is the total blue area. In other words, if the sum of the b
sub n converges, then so does the sum of the A sub N. Furthermore, if the total blue area
is infinite, then so is the total green area. So we can also say, if the sum of the ace
of ends diverges, then so does the sum of the base events. These facts are known as
the comparison test for series and are very useful in establishing convergence. But we
have to be careful not to take the conclusions too far. In particular, if the smaller series
of Ace events converges, then we really can't say anything about the larger series of these
events. The some of the big events could converge, red could diverge. Also, if the larger series
of B sub ends diverges, then we can't conclude anything about the smaller series of Ace events,
the sum of the ACE events could converge or could diverged. When using the comparison
test to establish convergence or divergence, it's handy to compare your unfamiliar series
to a familiar series that you already know converges or diverges. The following series
are especially handy when making these comparisons. First, the geometric series Sum of A times
r to the n, which converges when the absolute value of r is less than one. And second, the
P series, one over n to the P, which converges when p is greater than one. Let's use a comparison
theorem to determine whether the sum of three to the n over five to the n plus n squared
converges or diverges. What matters most as far as whether a series converges or diverges
is the behavior of the terms, when n gets close to infinity, the behavior of the terms
when n is small, the behavior the first few terms doesn't make any difference as far as
whether that series converges or diverges. So I'm going to focus on what happens to these
terms, as n goes to infinity, well, three to the n goes to infinity, and five to the
n goes to infinity, and n squared also goes to infinity. But between five to the n and n squared, five
to the n is going to infinity much faster. So I'm going to say that this five to the
n term dominates the denominator, it's more important. And for that reason, the behavior
of the series we're given should be similar to the behavior of the series, three to the
n, over five to the n, where I've just left out the n squared term, which is insignificant
compared to five to the n when n is large. So I'm going to compare our given series to
this other series, which is a geometric series. In fact, the second series we know converges, because
it has a common ratio of three fifths, and the absolute value of three fifths is less
than one. In order to use the comparison theorem, I'm going to need to compare the terms of
this series to the terms of this series. And I want to show that these terms are less than
or equal to those terms, because being smaller than a convergent series will guarantee convergence
is clear that everything's positive, so we don't have to worry about that. And it's also
clear that five to the n plus n squared is bigger than or equal to five to the n. When
you divide by a bigger number, you get a smaller ratio. So three to the n over five to the
n plus n squared is therefore less than or equal to three to the n over five to the n,
we've shown that the inequality we need holds. And so by the comparison theorem, since the
sum of three to the n over five to the n converges, so does our original series. We've established
convergence using the comparison test. This video was about the comparison test,
the fact that if we have zero less than or equal to A ad less than or equal to bn, and
the sum of the bands converges, then the sum of the smaller series A ends converges. And
if the sum of the ends diverges, then the sum of the larger series diverges. The limit
comparison test gives an alternative to the regular ordinary comparison test for series.
In the previous video, we looked at the series the sum from n equals one to infinity of three
to the n over five to the n plus n squared. And we use the ordinary comparison test and
compare it to the series, the sum of three to the n over five to the n. This worked out
pretty nicely, because the terms here are less than the terms here. And this series
converges. being less than a convergent series ensures convergence. But if we change the
problem very slightly, and look instead at the sum of three to the n over five to the
n minus n squared, look how things start to go wrong. If we now try to compare to the
same series, then we get the inequality five to the n minus n squared is less than or equal
to five to the n, and therefore, three to the n over five to the n minus n squared is
greater than or equal to three to the n over five to the n. Since dividing by a smaller
number gives a larger fraction, but this inequality unfortunately, is not useful to us, being
greater than a convergence series doesn't guarantee convergence or divergence. So we
can't conclude anything Based on this inequality, the limit comparison test gives us one way
around this. The limit comparison test says the following. Suppose that sum of a n and
the sum of bn are series with positive terms. If the limit as n goes to infinity of the
ratio of a n over bn, is a number L, where L is a finite number that's bigger than zero,
then either a both series converge, or both diverge, so they have the same convergence
status. Let's try the limit comparison test on the problem we were just working on. We
still want to compare to the same series, three to the n over five to the n. But this time, we're going to try a limit
comparison. So we're going to take the limit, as n goes to infinity of the ratio of terms,
three to the n over five to the n, divided by three to the n over five to the n minus
n squared, it doesn't actually matter which term goes on the top and which goes on the
bottom, we could instead take the ratio the other way, whatever limit we get, when we
do the ratio, this way, will just be the reciprocal of the limit, we get When do the ratio this
way. So if this ratio is a finite number that's bigger than zero, this ratio is reciprocal
will also be a finite number that's bigger than zero. So I'll just stick with the first
computation. let me simplify by flipping and multiplying, I can cancel my three to the
ends. And now I can actually rewrite this as the limit of one minus n squared over five
to the n. By breaking out my limit, this is the same as one minus the limit of n squared
over a five to the n. And the second limit is an infinity over infinity form. So using
lopi talls rule, carry the one over, I get and get the limit of what I get when I take
the derivative of the numerator and the derivative of the denominator, I've still got an infinity
over infinity and determinant form. So I'll use Libby toss rule again, the derivative
of two n is two, and the derivative of the denominator is ln five times ln five times
five to the n. Now the numerator is fixed at two, while the denominator goes to infinity
as n goes to infinity, therefore this fraction goes to zero. And my final limit is one. Since
one is bigger than zero, and it's finite, it's less than infinity. The limit comparison
test tells me that my original series and my comparison series, either both converge,
or both diverged. But my comparison series is a geometric series with ratio three fifths,
so it definitely converges. Therefore, by the limit comparison test, our given series
also converge us. That's the Limit Comparison theorem in action. The limit comparison test
tells us that for two series with positive terms, if the limit of the ratio of the terms
is some number, which is bigger than zero and less than infinity, then the two theories
have the same convergence status. That is, they either both converge or both diverged.
The limit comparison test is especially handy when the ordinary comparison test doesn't
seem to work when we know what we want to compare to, but we can't get the inequality
to go the right direction. In this video, I'll prove that the limit comparison test
works. The limit comparison test says that if the sum of the ACE events, and the sum
of the B sub ends are two series with positive terms. And if the limit as n goes to infinity
of the ratio, a sub n over B sub n is equal to L, where L is a finite number that's bigger
than zero, then either both series converge or both series diverged. To prove this theorem,
let's start by assuming that all the hypotheses are true. That is, we'll assume all the stuff
in brackets here is true. The limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n over B sub n equals
L means that if I plot the numbers, 123, and so on, on the x axis, so those are the values
of n, and I plot the ratios, a sub n over B sub n, on the y axis, those ratios are going
to settle down to a value of L, as n goes to infinity. Using more technical mathematical
language, it means that for any small number, epsilon that's bigger than zero, we
can trap the ratios within epsilon of L, as long as we go out far enough for our values
of n. That is, there exists a number capital N, such that n over bn is between L plus epsilon.
And l minus epsilon for little n bigger than or equal to capital N. In the picture here,
value for capital N of three would work, because for all little ends bigger than or equal to
three, my ratios are trapped in between r minus epsilon, which is right here, and l
plus epsilon, which is that upper bound here. Let's pick a small enough epsilon. So this
interval here doesn't extend all the way down to zero through zero on the y axis, it just
extends through through positive numbers near owl. Recall that that l itself is a positive
number, so it's possible to trap it in a little interval. That's all positive numbers. For
example, we could pick epsilon to be equal to L over two, for example, that way, the interval that I'm drawing here
would extend down to l minus l over two, which is equal to L over two, and our extend up
to l plus l over two, which is three L over two. So we have that l over two is less than
a n over bn is less than three L over two, four little n bigger than or equal to our
capital N that works for that value of epsilon. Now, I'm going to multiply all three sides
of this inequality by b sub n, recall that b sub n is a positive number, all the series
terms are positive, so that doesn't change around the inequalities at all. So we get
L over two times b sub n is less than a sub n is less than three L over two times b sub
n. And remember that everything here is bigger than zero, since all the ACE events and B
sub ends are positive. Let's think about what this inequality tells us. First of all, if
the sum of the beast events converges, then so does the sum of three L over two times
b sub n, because I'm just multiplying that series by a constant still convergent. But
now my a sub n terms are less than the terms of a convergent series. So by the ordinary
comparison test, we know that the sum of the ACE events converges also. Furthermore, if
the sum of the base events diverges, then we can focus on this part of the inequality,
we know that l over two times b sub n diverges also. And so here we have the ace of ends are bigger than the terms
of a Divergent series, so the sum of the AC bands must diverged, just using the ordinary
comparison test. Now, you might be worried about the fact that this inequality only holds
for little n bigger than or equal to some capital N. So we could rewrite this argument
a little bit to say, if the sum from n equals one to infinity of the base events converges,
then so does the sum from n equals capital n to infinity of b sub n, because adding or
subtracting finitely many terms off the front never changes the convergence status of a
series. After that, we can say well, then so does the sum from n equals capital n to
infinity. Three L over two times b sub n. And so then by the ordinary comparison test,
since this inequality does hold for our little n bigger than or equal to capital N, we can
conclude that the sum from little n equals capital n to infinity of a sub n converges.
And so the sum from n equals one to infinity of a sub n converges Also, since again, adding
or subtracting Finally, many terms from the beginning of a series doesn't change anything
about convergence. We could similarly rewrite the second part of the argument using precise
indices as well. We've shown that the sum of the B ends and the sum of the A ends either
both converge, or both diverged. And that completes the proof of the theorem. In this
video, we prove the limit comparison test using the ordinary comparison test. This video
defines absolute convergence and how it's related to convergence for a series. A series
is called absolutely convergent. If the series of absolute values of the terms converges.
Please pause the video for a moment and try to decide which of the following series are
convergent, and which ones are absolutely convergent. The first series is convergent,
because it's a geometric series with ratio r equal to negative 0.8. It's also absolutely
convergent, because if I take the series of absolute values, that's the same thing as
the series, the geometric series with a ratio of 0.8, which is also convergent. The second
series, the sum of one over the square root of k is not convergent, we can see this by
the P test. Since p is equal to one half, which is less than one. It's also not absolutely
convergent. In this case, the sum of the absolute values of the terms is just the same as the
sum of the original terms, which we already said diverges. The third series is the sum
of negative one to the J times one over j. This is a convergent series by the alternating
series test. In fact, this is the alternating harmonic series. What about absolute convergence?
If we look at the sum of the absolute values of the terms, that's just the same thing as
the regular harmonic series, which diverges. So this series is not absolutely convergent.
Here's a question for you. Is it possible to have a series that's convergent, but not
absolutely convergent? Please pause the video for a moment and try to answer this question.
The answer is yes. We just saw us an example of such a series, the alternating harmonic
series. There are many other examples of such theories. And in fact, there's a special name
for them, they're called conditionally convergent. A series is called conditionally convergent
if it is convergent, but not absolutely convergent. In symbols, that is, the sum of the a ns converges,
but the sum of the absolute values of the a ns diverges. Next question for you. Is it
possible to have a series that's absolutely convergent, but not convergent? This is a
little trickier. But please pause the video for a moment and think about your answer. The answer to this one is no. It's a fact
that every absolutely convergent series is convergent. Let me prove to you why that's
true. Let's suppose that we have a series that's absolutely convergent. That is the
sum of the absolute value of the A ends convergence. We know that the A ends might be positive
or negative, but they do have to lie in between the absolute value of a n and the negative
absolute value of a n. Actually, it's true that a sub n is either equal to its absolute
value or its negative absolute value, but I'm ready This way with inequalities to help
set the mood for using the comparison test. Now, I can't quite use a comparison test here
to prove that the series of Ace events converges, because even though the ace of ends are less
than or equal to the terms of a convergent series, they're not necessarily positive or
greater than equals zero. And the can parison test only applies to series whose terms are
all greater than equal to or equal to zero. But there's a nice trick to get around that
difficulty. And that trick is to add the absolute value of a sub n to all the sides of the inequality.
So then I get zero is less than or equal to a sub n plus the absolute value of a sub n,
which is less than or equal to twice the absolute value of a sub n. Now, since this sum of the
absolute value of f sub n converges, so does the sum of twice the absolute value of a sub
n, since it's just a constant multiple. Based on this inequality, which now does involve
terms that are greater than or equal to zero, I can conclude that the sum of a sub n plus
the absolute value of a sub n converges based on the ordinary comparison test. But now,
the series that we want, the sum of the ace of ends can be written as a difference. And
we know that a series formed by subtracting the terms of two convergent series itself
converges. So this converges, in fact, to the difference of the sobs. We've proved that
if our series is absolutely convergent, then it must be convergent. The fact that absolute
convergence implies convergence can come in handy when you're trying to prove that a series
converges, as in the following example. In this example, we want to prove that this series
is convergent or divergent, but the cosine and sine make things a little bit tricky.
My intuition here is that this series should converge since cosine and sine are bounded.
And so this essentially should behave something like the sum of one over n cubed, which converges
because of the P test. But we can't just compare our series to the
sum of one over n cubed and use the ordinary comparison test like we've done in similar
problems in the past. What's different here is that our terms are not always going to
be positive, because sine and cosine can be positive and negative. And so can there's
some to help us out of this pickle. Let's think about absolute convergence instead.
If we look at the sum of the absolute values, which is the same as the sum of the absolute
value of the numerator, divided by m cubed. Since cosine of n is between one and negative
one, and sine of n is also in between one and negative one, we know that the som cosine
n plus sine of n has to be less than or equal to two and bigger than or equal to negative
two. In fact, it can't even get all the way to two or all the way down to negative two,
we could find that tighter bound if we tried, but this is good enough for our purposes,
this inequality can be rewritten as the absolute value of cosine n plus sine of n is less than
or equal to two. And if I divide both sides here by n cubed, I have an inequality involving
positive terms. So since we know the sum of one over n cubed converges by the P test,
that implies that the sum of two over n cubed also converges. It's just a constant multiple.
And that implies that the sum of my absolute value of cosine n plus sine n over n cubed
converges by the comparison test. Therefore, we know that our series is absolutely convergent.
And therefore, it must be convergent. Since an absolutely convergent series is always
convergent. We've shown that our original series converges. In this video, we saw that
if a series is absolutely convergent, then it has to be convergent But not vice versa.
This video is about the ratio test, a test that can be used to prove that a series converges
or diverges. The ratio test is all about looking at the ratio of consecutive terms. To figure
out how it works, it can be helpful to think about geometric series first, recall it for
a geometric series, the ratio of consecutive terms is given by this number R. And if R
has absolute value less than one, the series converges. Why while if R has absolute value
greater than one, it diverges. For more general series, the ratio of consecutive terms is
not necessarily a constant. But if we look at the limit as n goes to infinity, of the
absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms, and if we get a limit of L, which is
less than one, then the series converges, just like a geometric series. In fact, the
series is absolutely convergent, meaning the sum of the absolute values of the a ns converges,
and therefore, the sum of the a ns converges also, if instead, the limit as n goes to infinity
of the absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms, is a number l that's greater than one.
Or if that limit is infinity, then just like a geometric series, the series diverges. Finally,
if the limit of the absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms is exactly equal
to one, or if the limit doesn't exist, then the ratio test is inconclusive. That is, the
sum of the ace of ends may converge. Or it may diverge. And to figure out, which will
have to use a different test or a different argument, let's apply the ratio test to this
series, we'll need to compute the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of
the ratio of consecutive terms. In this case, that's the limit as n goes to infinity, have
the absolute value of n plus one squared times negative 10 to the n plus one divided
by n plus one factorial, all of our n squared times negative 10 to the n over n factorial.
I've just plugged in n plus one for n in this formula to get the a sub n plus one term.
I can simplify this by flipping and multiplying. And I'm going to rearrange my factors. This
expression is equivalent to the previous one, I've just arranged factors so that similar
factors are on top of each other, this will make it easier to cancel things. Now, n factorial
means n times n minus one times n minus two and so on. And n plus one factorial means
n plus one, times n times n minus one, and so on. So if I divide n factorial by n plus
one factorial, all my factors from the numerator will cancel with factors from the denominator.
And I'll just be left with one over n plus one. Also, negative 10 to the n plus one over
negative 10 to the n cancels out to just negative 10 to the One Power, so I can rewrite my limit
as N plus one squared over n squared times negative 10 times one over n plus one, I'm
going to divide my limit of a product into a product of limits. Now as n goes to infinity,
n plus one over n goes to one. So this expression, which is equivalent to the square of n plus
one over N, also goes to one. The limit of the absolute value of negative 10 is just
10. And the limit as n goes to infinity of one over n plus one is zero. Therefore our
limit is one times 10 times zero, which is zero. And since zero is less than one by the
ratio test, we know that our series converges absolutely. This video was about the ratio
test, which focuses on the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of the ratio
of consecutive terms. Depending on whether this limit is less than one greater than one,
or equal to one, we can determine whether the series converges or diverges. Or if we
need to try another test. In this video, I prove the ratio test for convergence and divergence
of series. The ratio test says that for a series, if
the limit of the absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms is equal to a number
L, that's less than one, then the series is absolutely convergent, and therefore convergent.
If however, the limit of the absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms is a number
L, that's bigger than one, or is equal to infinity, then the series is divergent. Although
I didn't write it here, if the limit is equal to one exactly, or if the limit doesn't exist,
then the ratio test is inconclusive and can't be used to establish convergence or divergence.
To prove that the ratio test works, let's first assume that the limit is less than one.
This means that if I graph n on the x axis, and my absolute value of the ratio of consecutive
terms, on my Y axis, I get a bunch of dots that settle at a value of L. and this number
L is less than one. Let's pick a tiny number epsilon, so that when I add epsilon to L,
I'm still less than one. So pick epsilon greater than zero, such that
l plus epsilon is less than one. By the definition of limit, if I go far enough to the right
on the x axis, all of my red dots are going to be trapped in between this epsilon interval
around L. In mathematical symbols, this means there exists a number capital N, such that
the absolute value of ratios, the thing that's a limiting to L is between L plus epsilon.
And minus epsilon, for all little n bigger than or equal to capital that I'm going to multiply all three sides of this
inequality by the absolute value of a sub little m, I'm going to focus on the right
end of the inequality, because ultimately, I want to prove that my series is absolutely
convergent. So it's going to be more useful to show that my terms are smaller than things
than to show that my terms are bigger than things. This inequality is true for all values
of little n that are bigger than or equal to capital N. So in particular, it's true
when little n equals capital N. The inequalities also true when little n is equal to capital
N plus one. Here, I've just plugged in capital N plus one for a little n here. And when I
plug it in here, I end up with capital N plus one plus one, which is capital N plus two.
Now if I string these two inequalities together, essentially, I'm substituting in this inequality,
right here, I get the following inequality, which simplifies to give me the absolute value
of a sub capital N plus two is less than l plus epsilon squared times the absolute value
of a sub capital N. Let's try this one more time. Going back to my original inequality
here, I'm going to plug in capital N plus two for lowercase n. And stringing these two
inequalities together, I get that this is less than l plus epsilon cube times the absolute
value of a piece of capital N. And in general, the same reasoning shows that the absolute
value of a sub capital N plus i is less than l plus epsilon to the i times the asset value
of a sub capital N. For any I. With all these inequalities, I'm gradually building up to
series. The first series is the series, the sum of the absolute value of a sub capital
N plus i. Let's start that from i equals one to infinity. And the second series is the
sum of L plus epsilon to the i times the absolute value of a so capital that again, let's start
from equals one to infinity. Now the second series is a geometric series, where r is equal
to L plus epsilon, which is less than one, because remember, we chose epsilon to make
sure that was less than one. Therefore, this series converges. But that's
great news. Because now looking at this inequality, we can show that series one converges, just
using the ordinary comparison test, and recognizing that these terms are bigger than or equal
to zero. So series one converges by the comparison test. But series one is just the tail end
of the series, the sum from n equals one to infinity absolute value of a sub little n.
So this series converges, because it's just finally many terms added on to a convergent
series. And so we've shown that our original series converges absolutely. This proves the
first part of the ratio test. Now let's prove the second part. And let's start by assuming
that the limit is greater than one. This time, since l is bigger than one, we can pick a
tiny number epsilon, so that when we go down from L by epsilon, we don't go as far as the
number one. So we're going to pick an epsilon greater than zero, such that l minus epsilon
is still greater than one. As before, we can use the definition of limit and a little algebra
to get the same inequality as we got before. This time, I'm going to focus on the left
side of the inequality though. Since l minus epsilon is greater than one. This tells me
in particular, that the absolute value of a sub n plus one is always bigger than the
absolute value of as little n for little n bigger than or equal to capital N. This means
that the absolute value of Ace of capital n is less than the absolute value of a sub
capital N plus one, which is less than the absolute value of capital A sub capital N
plus two, and so on. And so my sequence of terms is actually ultimately an increasing
sequence of positive numbers. So my sequence of terms cannot converge to zero, limit as
little n goes to infinity as the value of a sub little n cannot be zero. And so the
limit as little n goes to infinity of a sub little n cannot be zero either. But that means
that my original series cannot converge, it has to diverged by the divergence test, we
still have one detail that consider the possibility that the limit of the absolute value of ratios
is infinity. In this case, the argument that we just used, works almost exactly the same.
If we assume that the limit is infinity, then we can skip this part here. And here, and just note that there exists
some capital n such that the ratios are always bigger than say to for all little n bigger
than or equal to capital N. Since if the ratios are heading towards infinity, they're certainly
going to be bigger than two, eventually. This gives us the same inequality that we need,
I just read a two there. And now as before, we can conclude that a sub n plus one is absolute
value is strictly greater than a sub n is absolute value. In fact, it's greater than
twice of it for all little n bigger than equal to capital N. And we can make the same conclusion
about an increasing sequence of positive terms. That so that the terms can't go to zero, and
the series has to diverge by the divergence test. This concludes the proof of the ratio
test. In this video, we prove the convergent part of the ratio test by comparing our series
to a convergent geometric series, and we prove the divergent part of the ratio test using
the divergence test. This video is a review of all the convergence tests we've talked
about in class. I'll list the test roughly in the order that I would try to apply them.
I like to start with the divergence test. Usually it's pretty easy to check if the limit
as n goes to infinity of the terms is equal to zero. And if not, you're done because the
series diverges. Be careful though. The divergence test can only be used to check for divergence,
it cannot be used to prove convergence, because if the limits of the terms is equal to zero,
the series may converge, but it may still diverge. The next thing I do is to check if
the series is a simple p series, or a geometric series. Remember, a p series is a series of
the form one over n to the p n is our indexing variable P is some number like two or 5.8.
And this is easy to test for convergence since it converges. If p is greater than one and
it diverges, otherwise, a geometric series this is the kind of the form a times r to
the n, where A is the first term, and they start at zero here. So it's the really the
first term and r is the common ratio. And this one's easy to check to because it converges
if the absolute value of r is less than one and diverges otherwise. If the series happens
to be alternating, than the alternating test is a good one to apply next. Be careful, this
test can only be used to prove convergence. If the series is actually alternating. And
this what I call this step size, that's the absolute value of the terms is going to zero
and decreasing, then we can conclude that the series converges. But if some of those
conditions are not satisfied, we can't automatically assume that the series diverges. Well, not
at least by the alternating test, if the step size doesn't go to zero, then we should have
already figured out the series diverges by the divergence test were really, really applying
the divergence test there. And if the step size is not decreasing, not even ultimately
decreasing, then the alternating test is just inconclusive. It doesn't apply, we don't know
yet, whether it diverges or converges, and we have to look for another test. Now if the
series is not one of these nice p series geometric or alternating series, my go to test is going
to be the ratio test. The ratio test is especially good for series with n factorials in them or two to the ends and things with sort of geometric
pieces that are not strictly geometric are good candidates for the ratio test. But be
careful, the ratio test will be inconclusive for like all p like series, so series that
just have you know things like ends and, and maybe the square roots of ends and things
that can be easily compared to a p series are not good candidates for the ratio test.
So if you happen to remember that you can save some time by not trying the ratio test
on those. If the ratio test is not a good candidate or ends up being inconclusive, what
I might try next is one of the comparison tests. So that would be like what I call the ordinary
or the limit comparison test. We generally want to compare two series that we know a
lot about that we know the convergence status of so we would generally want to compare to
either p series or geometric series. The comparison tests are especially good for p like series
that the ratio test is inconclusive for. And to figure out what to compare to it's a good
rule of thumb to consider the dominant or highest power terms. One thing you need to
be aware of when applying the comparison test is that it only applies to series with positive
terms. Of course, the first few terms never matter for series convergence. So it's okay
to apply it if you have eventually positive terms. But if the terms never become always
positive, and they're not strictly alternating, so the alternating test doesn't apply. We
don't have to give up hope we can use the fact that absolute convergence implies convergence.
That's what I try and sort of mine since my seventh test to try. So you can just take
the absolute values of your terms and then maybe use the comparison test. And if that
works to prove convergence, then your original series will converge also. Another method
I haven't mentioned before is to use limit laws to split up the series. So if you have
the sum of two series, say a p series and a geometric series, then a natural thing to
do is to split this up as the sum of two series and use a different method for each piece.
If both pieces converge, like they do in this situation, then the psalm also converges.
Also, if one piece happens to converge on the other diverges, then the sun will diverged.
The only thing to be careful of is that if both pieces diverged, then the psalm may still
diverged. But it may converge because there might be cancellation, one piece might be
diverted into infinity and one piece may be diverging to negative infinity. And that's
an indeterminate kind of form. If none of this stuff has worked so far, I might look
to try the integral test and compare my series to an integral. This is especially handy in
my experience four series with logs in them. So something and also it has to be a series
where the integral of easy compute so you know, something like ln n over n, if you instead
look at the integral of ln x over x, that's pretty easy to compute using use substitution.
And so that would be a good candidate for the integral test. Be aware that the integral
test can only be used when the series terms can be thought of as the functions values
at integers for a function that is positive, continuous, and decreasing. Last on my list
is the method of telescoping series. I put it last only because it's kind of a hassle
to work with telescoping series, but it does have some good points. First of all, using
the method of telescoping series, you can actually compute the sum rather than just
tell if it converges or diverges. The only other tool on this list that will actually
compute the sum of an infinite series is the geometric series test where we have a formula
for the sum provided it converges. Another reason to use the telescoping series is if
you happen to notice that your terms are the difference of related expressions. So something
like the sum of e to the one over n plus one minus e to the one over N might be a good
candidate for telescoping series. Something like the sum of one over n squared minus one
would also be a reasonable candidate, because you can rewrite it using the method of partial
fractions. And using that method well, and the telescoping series stuff will help you
find an actual song. But if you just want to know convergence, it'll be a lot easier
just to use comparison to a p series whenever n squared for this one. So that's pretty much
everything I know about convergence tests for series. If you want to keep watching,
I'll take a look at some examples on the next page. Before you keep watching, please take
a moment to look at these six examples and decide which convergence or divergence test
you might try. Please be aware that for many of these series, there
are lots of tests that will work. So just because you pick a different one than I do
doesn't mean that yours is wrong. I think this first example can be conquered using
the divergence test. My hunch is if we took that limit and use lopi talls rule, we get
a limit of infinity not zero. An alternative though would be to use the ratio test. Because
this is a term that is has a geometric piece as well
as some other stuff. The second example is an alternating series. So my first try is
going to be the alternating series test. And my recollection is it does work to prove convergence
in this case. For this third one, this is the kind that I call a p like series, because
if I just look at the the dominant terms, the highest power terms, I could compare to
the P series, which is one over and squared cubed rooted or in other words, one over n
to the two thirds power. Since this one diverges, I'm gonna expect my original one also diverged,
I probably need to use the limit comparison test because I don't think the inequalities
will go the right direction for the ordinary comparison test. This next one's a perfect
candidate for splitting up into two pieces. This one, the second piece, I could use the
geometric series test to show convergence. And this first one says it has an n factorial
that's a great candidate for the ratio test. This next one's kind of tricky for me. At
first glance, I almost thought it would be a candidate for the integral test. If this
had just been an N instead of an n squared, I might be able to integrate using use substitution.
But because it's an n squared, the integral test would be more tricky to do or I might
have to do integration by parts or something. So I'm gonna stay away from that. And I'm
going to start by trying the ratio test because this does have a geometric kind of like piece
to it. And this last example, I'm going to use the integral test here because I know
like To integrate one over x ln x dx, using the use substitution u equals ln x, apply
and converge, the divergence test is something that takes practice, the more you do it, the
better you'll be at recognizing which tests might apply. But a lot of times, there's no
substitute for just trying the test. And if it doesn't work, it's where it's inconclusive.
Just try something else. Good luck, and see you in class. This video introduces some of
the ideas and key formulas of Taylor series. One of the main ideas behind Taylor series,
the idea of approximating functions with polynomials. So suppose we have some function f of x, we
want to approximate this function with a polynomial, and we'd like the approximation to be good
near x equals zero. And we're going to assume that f prime of zero exists, and f double
prime of zero exists, and F third derivative exists at zero, all of its derivatives, we're
gonna assume exists at x equals zero. Now, if we just want to get F value, right at zero, we can approximate F with the constant function,
y equals f of zero, we can think of this constant function as being a degrees zero polynomial
approximation. But it's a pretty lousy approximation, we can do much better than that, in fact,
we can do a lot better even if we just use a degree one polynomial, that's a linear function.
As you know, the tangent line at x equals zero is a linear function that provides a
pretty good approximation for the actual function when x is near zero least that's the best
approximation you can hope for out of a linear function. The equation for the tangent line
is given by y equals f of zero, plus f prime of zero times x. This comes straight from
the point slope form for a line where m is the slope of the tangent line, that's the
derivative at zero, and the point x one y one is just the point zero, f of zero. So
we get y minus f of zero is f prime of zero times x minus zero, which simplifies to that
equation for the tangent line right there. Notice that the tangent line has the same
value as f of x at x equals zero, and it has the same slope as f of x at x equals zero.
But I'd like to do a little better than this, I'd like to approximate my function f of x
with a polynomial that has the same value, the same slope or first derivative, and the
same second derivative as f of x at x equals zero. It turns out, I can do this with a degree
two polynomial. And I'll show you how, in general, a degree two polynomial, also called
a quadratic is a polynomial of the form P of x equals c sub zero, plus c sub one times
x, plus c sub two times x squared. And I just have to figure out what values of the constants
C sub zero, c sub one, c sub two, will make my polynomial, agree with my function in its
value, first derivative and second derivative. Well, if I want P of zero to equal f of zero,
and that means I want c sub zero plus c sub one times zero plus c sub two times zero squared
to equal s value at zero. In other words, c sub zero had better be equal to f of zero.
But now I also want p prime of zero to equal f prime of zero. P prime of x is equal to
c sub one plus two times c sub 2x. I'm just using my derivative rules on the equation
for p remembering that my C's are constants. Therefore, to evaluate p prime of zero, I
just plug in zero for x, and I get c sub one, but this needs to equal f prime of zero, and
therefore c sub one is equal to f prime of zero. Finally, I want p double prime of zero
to equal f double prime at zero, I can find p double prime of x by taking the derivative
of my derivative, so that gives me two times C two, but that needs to equal f double prime
of zero means that C two had better equal f double prime of zero divided by two. So
now let's look what happened, requiring that P has the same value as zero as f forces c
sub zero to have the value of f of zero, requiring that the polynomial and F had the same first
derivative zero, forces the value of CS of one, two equal f prime of zero, and requiring
that the polynomial and the function have the same second derivative at zero forces
the value of c two to be f double prime of zero divided by two. So we've shown that there
is a secondary polynomial that has the same value first derivative, the second derivative
as F at X equals zero, and there's a unique such polynomial, and it's given by p of x
equals f of zero, plus f prime of zero times x, plus f double
prime of zero over two times x squared. Visually, that second degree polynomials going
to look like a parabola, it might look something like this. Let's play this game again. But
this time, I want to find a degree three polynomial p of x, such that P of zero is the same as
f of zero, p prime of zero is the same thing as f prime of zero, p double prime of zero
is equal to f double prime of zero, and peas, third derivative at zero is the same as F,
third derivative at zero. Graphically, that's going to be a cubic polynomial
that approximates my function, and it's going to be a pretty close approximation. We know
that a three three polynomial in general has the form c sub zero plus c sub 1x, plus c
sub 2x squared plus c sub 3x cubed. And we need to find the values of all the constant
C's. Please pause the video and see if you can figure out the values of those constants,
especially the value of c sub three in terms of the value of f and its derivatives at zero.
If we write down the derivatives of P, we get the following expressions. And if we evaluate
these expressions at x equals zero, all the terms with x's in them vanish. So we get these
expressions. Now, because we want our polynomials value, and its derivatives to match the value
and derivatives of our function, we get these equations from which we can solve for our
constants, c sub zero is f of zero, c sub one is f prime of zero, c sub two is f double
prime of zero over two, and c sub three is the third derivative of f at zero divided
by six. Notice that that number six came from multiplying three times two, and that three
and that two came from bringing down my success of exponents, when I took derivatives, we
can keep track of this process by rewriting c sub three is the third derivative of f of
zero divided by three times two or three factorial. So the third degree polynomial that approximates
our function is p of x, which is f of zero, plus f prime of zero times x plus f double
prime of zero over two times x squared, plus f third derivative at zero over three factorial
times x cubed. I'll write this as P sub three to remember it's the third degree polynomial.
We can repeat this process to get a fourth degree polynomial whose value add zero is
the same as f of zero, and whose first four derivatives at zero are the same as f first
for derivatives at zero. Please pause the video and either work out expressions for
the coefficients of peace and four, or else make an educated guess what those coefficients
should be based on the patterns you say. You should get the fourth degree polynomial has
the same first terms as a third degree polynomial and has a final term of f, fourth derivative
at zero over four factorial times x to the fourth. If we continue this process forever
Finding polynomials of higher and higher degree that match more and more derivatives of f.
Then in the limit, we'll have infinitely many terms that look like this. This is an infinite
series, and it can be written in summation notation as the sum from n equals zero to
infinity of the nth derivative of f at zero, divided by n factorial times x to the nth
power. This works as long as we use the conventions, that the zeroeth derivative means just the
function that zero factorial is equal to one, and that x to the zero is just equal to one,
even if x is zero. This infinite series is called the Maclaurin series for f of x. And
it's also called the Taylor series for f of x centered at x equals zero. Now, so far,
we've been focusing on the value of f and its derivatives at x equals zero. What if
we wanted to approximate f of x near x equals a, please pause the video and write down what
you think the Taylor series centered at x equals A should look like. This is a series
I'll call it T of x, that we want to match F's value at A. and we want all of its derivatives to match
f derivatives at a, it makes sense that this series should have a formula similar to the
formula we just found. But it should involve derivatives at a instead of derivatives at
zero. In addition, the formula needs to involve powers of x minus a, instead of powers of
x. I'll leave you to think about the details. And to verify that this series really does
have the derivatives that we wanted to have. In this video, we tried to approximate a function
by polynomials that had the same value and derivatives at x equals zero. And we ended
up with a formula for a Taylor series at x equals zero, which we generalized to a Taylor
series centered at x equals a. This video defines power series. informally, a power
series is a series with a variable in it, often the letter X, and it looks like a polynomial
with infinitely many terms. For example, if we look at the series, the sum from n equals
zero to infinity of two n plus one times x to the n over three to the n minus one, that's
a power series with variable x. If we expand that out by plugging in values of n, we get
one n equals 01 times x to the zero over three to the minus 1x to the zero is one and three
to the minus one on the denominator is the same as three on the numerator. So we can
rewrite this term as just three. The next term, when n equals one, is three times x
to the one over three to the zero, we can rewrite this as 3x, since three to the zero
is one. The next term is 5x squared over three, and we can continue like this. I want to point
out that when working with power series, x to the zero is always taken to be one, even
though there's a possibility that x could end up being zero, and zero to the zero is
considered undefined in other contexts. When working with power series, x to the zero for
any value of x is one. The next series expands out to one plus five times x minus six, and
so on. This is an example of a power series centered at six because of all the factors
of x minus six. In general, a power series centered at a is a series of the form the
sum from n equals zero to infinity of c sub n times x minus a to the n, where x is the
variable. The cease events are real numbers, they're constants, called the coefficients,
and a is also a real number a constant that's called the center. If I expand out the power
series and read out the first few terms that looks like this, where c sub zero is the constant
term, notice that x minus A to the zero is taken to be one, even when x equals a. If
the power series is centered at zero, then we just set a equal to zero, we can write
this a little more efficiently in the following form. Sometimes you might see a power series
that starts with index of one instead of zero. That's perfectly legit. It just means there's
no constant term. Or if you prefer, you can think of the constant term as being zero.
It's also fun for the index to start at some other positive number. But it's not considered a power series if
the index starts at a negative number, resulting in x's in the denominator. That's all for
the definition of power series. Recall that a power series is a series with a variable
in it. In this example, the C sub n and the A are supposed to be real numbers that are
held constant, so the only variable is x. That's the only place where I can plug in
different values at different times. This video explores the question of for what values
of the variable x does the power series converge, and for what values of x does it diverged.
Let's look at a few examples. First, for what values of x does this power series converge.
There's one value of x that I know for sure it converges for, please pause the video for
a moment and try to guess which value of x I'm thinking of the series definitely converges
when x equals three. If I expand out the first few terms of the series, I get this expression.
then plugging in three 4x, all of my terms vanish to zero, except for my constant term
of one. So at x equals three, the series converges to its constant turn. And in fact, this is
true of any power series all power series converge at their center. But let's see what
other values of exit converges for. Although we have many tests for convergence in our
toolkit, the ratio test is usually the best test to use to determine where of power series
converges. For the ratio test, we need to take the limit as n goes to infinity of the
absolute value of the ratio of consecutive terms. For our example, this is n plus one
factorial times x minus three to the n plus one divided by n factorial times x minus three
to the N. Let's simplify by canceling things. We get n plus one, times x minus three. Now
x minus three is some number. And I'll assume it's a nonzero number, since I already dealt
with the case when x equals three, so I have a nonzero number that stays fixed as n goes
to infinity times a number that's going to infinity. So the absolute value of the product
has to go to infinity, no matter what x value we have, other than the x value of three.
The ratio test says that if this limit is infinity, the series diverges. Therefore,
the power series diverges for all values of x except for three. The only place where it
converges is at the center of three. In this next example, the center of this series is
negative four. So the series definitely converges when x equals negative four. Let's use the
ratio test to figure out what other values of x make it converge. So we'll take the limit
as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of a sub n plus one over a sub n. This works
out to the limit the absolute value of negative two to the n plus one times x plus four to
the n plus one divided by n plus one factorial, all over negative two to the n x plus four
to the n over n factorial. Let's simplify by flipping and multiplying and rearranging
a little. After canceling, we get the limit of the opposite value of negative two times
x plus four divided by n plus one. The numerator of this expression doesn't depend on an n,
so it stays fixed as n goes to infinity, but the denominator goes to infinity. Therefore,
we're dividing some fixed constant by larger and larger numbers, and so this limit is equal
to zero. Once again, the limit doesn't depend on x as value It's always zero no matter what
axis. So by the ratio test zero is less than one, the series converges for all values of
x. Here's our third and last example, in this
example, it's a little trickier to figure out what the center is, one thing we can do
is to rewrite the series in a more standard form by factoring out the negative five, then
we get negative five times x minus two fifths, all raised to the nth power over N, I can
rewrite this again as negative five to the n times x minus two fifths to the n over n.
And in this more standard form, it's easy to recognize that the center is two fifths.
Another way to find the center is just to figure out the value of x, that makes terms
go to zero. So in our case, if we want negative 5x plus two, two equals zero, we need X to
equal two fifths. And therefore, two fifths must be the center, like we found before.
In any case, our series converges for x equals two fifths, for sure, but it might converge
for other values of x. So let's use the ratio test. To find other values of x that make
the series converge. We start off the same way as usual, by taking a limit of a ratio
of the n plus one than n terms. And then we simplify by flipping and multiplying. And
after canceling, we get the limit of negative 5x plus two times n over n plus one as n goes
to infinity, and over n plus one goes to one. And negative 5x plus two doesn't depend on
n. So this final limit is just the absolute value of negative 5x plus two. So by the ratio
test, our series converges when this limit is less than one, and it diverges when the
limit is greater than one, the ratio test is inconclusive when the absolute value of
negative 5x plus two is exactly equal to one, so we'll worry about that case later. Let's
solve the first absolute value inequality. When the absolute value of something is less
than one, that means that the quantity inside the absolute value sign has to be between
one and negative one. So we can rewrite the absolute value inequality as negative one
is less than negative 5x plus two, which is less than one, we can solve this for x by
subtracting two and dividing by negative five. dividing by a negative number reverses the
direction of the inequality signs. So we have that our series converges for these values
of x. Now let's solve the second absolute value and equality. The one that tells us
where the power series diverges, the series diverges when the absolute value of negative
5x plus two is greater than one. When the absolute value of something is greater than
one, that means that whatever is inside the absolute value sign has to either be less
than negative one or greater than one. So we can replace our absolute value in equality
with two inequalities. Negative 5x plus two is less than negative one, or negative 5x
plus two is greater than one. Let's solve these inequalities by subtracting two and
dividing by negative five. And similarly on the other side. So our series diverges when
x is greater than three fifths or less than 1/5. That makes sense, it's kind of the opposite
of where it converges because we're solving an absolute value inequality with the opposite
inequality side. Putting all this information together, we see that our series converges
when x is between 1/5 and three fifths and divert On either side of this interval, we still don't know what happens when x is
exactly equal to 1/5, or exactly equal to three fifths, since those values correspond
to the case when the ratio test is inconclusive. So let's turn our attention to the x values
of 1/5 and three fifths Next, let me write down our original power series, it was the
sum from n equals one to infinity of negative 5x plus two to the n over n. If we want to know if this power series converges
at x equals 1/5, let's just plug in x equals 1/5. This simplifies to the sum of one to
the n over n, which is just the regular harmonic series, which diverges. If we plug in x equals
three fifths, we get this series, which simplifies to the alternating harmonic series. So it
converges. So now we know that the series converges when x equals three fifths and diverges
when x equals 1/5. And our final answer is that the power series converges on the interval
from 1/5 to three fifths, where we use an open bracket, to denote that we exclude the
endpoint 1/5, because the series diverges there, and the closed bracket, square bracket
means that we include the endpoint of three fifths where the series does converge. I want
to make one more observation. Before we leave this example. Notice that the midpoint of
this interval is the number 2/5. Remember, at the beginning of the problem, we calculated
the center of the power series, and it was also two fifths. We'll see in a moment that
this is no coincidence. In fact, the interval of convergence is always centered at the center
of the power series. And we could in fact, describe the interior of this interval of
convergence as the x values for which x minus that center is less than 1/5. Bet is all x
values within a distance of 1/5. From the interval center. We've seen three examples
of power series, and each one converge in a very different way. In general, it turns
out that there are only these three different types of convergence that we've already seen.
It's possible, like we saw on the first example, that a series might converge only at its center.
It's also possible that a power series could converge for all values of x. This is what
happened in our second example. But if neither of these two cases hold, then the only other
possibility is that there exists a number R, such that R is series converges anytime,
where within our units from the center a and the power series diverges for any x values
that are more than our units from the center array. In symbols, I can right there exists
a number are such that the power series converges when the absolute value of x minus a is less
than R, and diverges when the absolute value of x minus a is greater than R, since the
absolute value of x minus a represents the distance between x and a. This was a situation
we saw in our third example. Now in the first case, we say that the radius of convergence
of the power series is zero. In the second example, we say the radius of convergence
is infinity. And in the third example, we say the radius of convergence is our since
our represents the distance from the center of the interval, sort of like the radius of
a circle represents the circles distance from the center. Now the interval of convergence
is the interval of all x values for which the power series converges. So in our first
situation, the interval of convergence is just the number a it's not really an interval,
just a single number, but we call it the interval of convergence anyway, in the second situation,
our interval of convergence is the interval from now negative infinity to infinity. And
then the third situation, the interval of convergence includes this entire interval
here that extends from the number A minus r to the number A plus R. So our interval could be the open interval,
a minus r to a plus R. But it could also include one or more endpoints, so it could be the
closed interval, or it could just include the left endpoint, or just the right endpoint.
In this video, I worked out some examples using the ratio test to figure out what x
values make a power series converge. I also stated the fact that there are only three
options for convergence of a power series, convergence at the center only convergence
for all real numbers and convergence on some finite interval centered at the center of
the power series. This video gives an example of computing the interval of convergence and
the radius of convergence for a power series. To compute the radius of convergence and interval
of convergence for this power series, we start by using the ratio test. So we need to find
the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of a sub n plus one over a sub n, where
the a sub ns are the terms for this power series, we can compute a sub n plus one, by
just plugging in n plus one everywhere we see an N in this expression. So that's negative
four to the n plus one, times x minus eight to the two times quantity and plus one divided
by n plus one. We divide all that by the A sub N term, which is just negative four to
the n x minus eight to the to n over n, which I've just copied from the formula here. Now
I'm going to simplify, flip and multiply. And now I'm going to rearrange terms so that
corresponding terms are on top of each other. So I'm going to write negative four to the
n plus one over negative four to the n times x minus eight to the to quantity n plus one, that's the same thing
as two n plus two, over x minus eight to the two n. And then I'll write the N and N plus
one. So that's n over n plus one. Once I cancel terms, I get the limit of negative four times
x minus eight squared times n over n plus one. Now, as n goes to infinity, n over n
plus one is going to one, and the absolute value of negative four is just four. And the
absolute value of x minus eight squared is just going to be x minus eight squared, since
this expression is always positive, so we have our limit. And the ratio test says the
series will converge where this limit is less than one. So next, let's set four times x
minus eight squared to be less than one and solve for x. In other words, x minus a squared
is less than 1/4. Now we can't solve this quadratic inequality by taking the square
root of both sides, that would lead to something like x minus eight is less than plus or minus
the square root of 1/4, which doesn't even make any sense. And it's not true. What we
can do instead is solve the quadratic equation, x minus eight squared is equal to 1/4. And
then use some logic to figure out the inequality. So now that we have an equation sign, we can
take the square root of both sides to get x minus eight is is equal to plus or minus
the square root of 1/4. In other words, x minus eight is plus or minus one half. So
in other words, x is equal to eight plus one half, or eight minus one half. That's either
17 halves, or 15 halves. Now let's go back to the inequality that we're interested in.
Since we know that x minus eight squared is equal to 1/4. At x values of 15 halves and
17 halves, we can test to see whether x minus eight squared is bigger or smaller than 1/4.
by plugging in values in between these numbers, so when x is less than 15, half just by plugging
in a sample value like zero, we can see that x minus eight squared will be bigger than
1/4. Well, when x is between 15 halves and 17 halves, say the value of eight, the plug
in eight and 4x, and see that eight minus eight squared, which is zero, is going to
be less than 1/4. And finally, plugging in a value of x over here, maybe something like
10 for x, we're going to get a value of x minus eight squared, that is, again, bigger
than 1/4. So putting this together, we can see that x minus eight squared is less than
1/4. When x is between 15 halves, and 17 halves. So by the ratio test, our series converges.
For x between 15 halves, and 17 halves the ratio test also tells us the series diverges.
When this expression is greater than one in order other words, x minus eight squared is
greater than 1/4. In other words, for x values less than 15 halves are greater than 17 halves.
Now the only thing we still need to figure out is what happens at the endpoints of the
interval 15 halves to 17 half's recall that our series was given by this formula. So when
x is equal to 15 halves, we have negative four to the n 15 halves minus eight to the
to n over n, which is equal to negative four to the n, negative one half to the two n over
n, which I can rewrite as negative one to the n times four to the n times negative one
to the two N over two to the to n divided by n, which is the same thing as negative
one to the n four to the n, negative one to the two n divided by n times two squared to
the N. Since two n is always even negative one to the two, n is always equal to one.
And since two squared is four, this four to the n on the denominator cancels with the
four to the n on the numerator. So I'm left with the alternating harmonic series, which
we know converges. So the series converges for x equal to 15 halves. Now at x equals
17 halves, we can go through the same computation, just using 17 halves in place of 15 halves,
that changes the negative one half here to a positive one half. And now we have a positive
one to the two n, which is still always one, everything else works the same. And so we
still have a conversion series. So going back up to the top, we know that the series actually
converges for x greater than or equal to 15 halves and less than or equal to 17 halves.
That is our interval of convergence. closed bracket 50 and a half to 17 halves close bracket.
That is that the interval of convergence has length one, because 17 halves minus 15 halves,
the difference of the two endpoints is two halves, which is one also, the interval of
convergence has center of eight because the average of the endpoints 17 halves plus 15
halves over two is equal to eight. This should come as no
surprise, because our original series was centered at eight. So if we draw our interval
of convergence on the number line, it's centered at eight, and extends out a total distance
of one unit. In other words, it extends out by half a unit on either side. And so the
radius of convergence is the length of the interval divided by two, or one half. So we
found the radius of convergence. And we found the interval of convergence, which was this
closed interval here. And so that completes the problem. In this video, I'll prove some
of the key facts about convergence of power series. My ultimate goal is to prove that
there are only three possible options for convergence, a power series could converge
only at its center, it could converge for all real numbers. And if these two options
don't hold, then there must exist a number are such that the power series converges for all
x, within our units away from the center a and the power series diverges. for all x, his distance from a is greater than our first
I'll prove some preliminary facts. I'll start with this one. If a power series converges
when x is equal to b, for some nonzero number B, then it also converges for any x whose
absolute value is less than the absolute value of b. To prove this fact, let's assume that
the power series converges when x is equal to b, that is, the sum of c sub n times beats
to the n converges. If a series converges, then the limit of its
terms has to equal zero. Since if the limit of the terms is not equal to zero, the series
would have to diverged by the divergence test. Therefore, by the definition of limit, for
any epsilon, there exists a number capital N, such that c sub n times b to the n is between
zero plus epsilon, and zero minus epsilon for little n bigger than or equal to capital
N. In particular, if we pick epsilon equal to one, this says there exists a capital n
such that negative one is less than c sub n times b to the n is less than one for little
n bigger than or equal to capital N, I can rewrite this statement as the absolute value
of c sub n times b to the n is less than one for little n bigger than or equal to capital
N. Now, if x is any number, with absolute value less than the absolute value of b, we
can write the absolute value of c sub n times x to the n as the absolute value of c sub
n times b to the n times x over a b to the n, just using algebra, I can rewrite this
as c sub as the value of c sub n times b to the n times the absolute value of x over b to the n. For little n bigger than or equal to capital
N, we know that the opposite value of c sub n times b to the n is less than one. So this expression has to be less than the
absolute value of x over b to the n. Now if the absolute value of x is less than the absolute
value of b, this means that the absolute value of x over b is less than one. So the series
The sum of X absolute value of x over b to the n is a geometric series, whose ratio has
absolute value less than one, so it's a convergent series. Now, the ordinary comparison test
tells us that the sum of the absolute value of c sub n, x to the n also converges, because
we know that the terms of that series are less than the terms of our convergent geometric
series. Therefore, our original series The sum of c sub n, x to the n converges absolutely,
and therefore converges. So we've proved the first statement. The second statement says
that if the power series diverges when x is equal to d for some nonzero number D, then
it also diverges. Whenever we have an x whose absolute value is greater than the absolute
value of D. The statement follows directly from the first statement, because suppose
we have the sum of c sub n times d to the n diverges. If the absolute value of x is
bigger than the absolute value of d, and the sum of c sub n x to the n converged, then
by part one, the sum of c sub n, d to the n would have to converge, since the absolute
value of d is less than the absolute value of x. But this contradicts the assumption
that the sum of c sub n times d to the n diverges. And therefore, we know that the sum of c sub
n times x to the n must diverged after all. That's all for the proof of facts about convergence
of series. In this video, we'll talk about power series as functions. Consider the function
defined by f of x is equal to the sum from n equals zero to infinity of x to the n. This
can also be written as one plus x plus x squared, and so on. When we think of this as a function,
the variable x becomes our independent variable, or input variable. So to figure out the values
of f, we can plug in numbers for x and evaluate. Please pause the video and calculate F of
1/3. f of 1/3 is equal to one plus a third plus a third squared, and so on, this is a
geometric series. So it adds up to the first term one divided by one minus the ratio of
1/3. And that simplifies to three halfs. Next question, what's the domain of f of x, we
can think of the domain of a function as the values of the input variable x, that give
us a real number as output? Please pause the video to write down your answer for the domain
of f of x. The series, the sum of x to the n converges when x is between negative one
and one. So for these values of x, we get a finite real number as our answer for f of
x. Also, the series diverges for other values of x. So we don't get a real number answer
when we plug in values of x less than or equal to negative one or greater than or equal to
one. Therefore, the domain of f of x is the set of X values for which negative one is
less than x is less than one, or an interval notation, we can write this as the interval
from negative one to one. And in general, the domain of a power series
is exactly the set of values where it converges. By a closed form expression for f of x, I
mean an expression that doesn't involve a summation sign, I can write the sum of X to the N, without
the summation sign by using the geometric series formula, first term is one divided
by one minus the common ratio of x. This holds for all x values between negative one and
one as usual, where the geometric series converges. Therefore, I can write f of x as one over
one minus x for x values in that interval. Notice that if I just looked at the function,
g of x equals one over one minus x out of context, it would have domain spanning from
negative infinity to one together with the interval one to infinity. Because this function
g of x is defined for all x values that are not equal to one. So f of x and g of x are
not exactly the same function. They have different domains, but they are exactly equal on the
interval from negative one to one. And we say that the function g of x is represented
by the power series, the sum from n equals zero to infinity of x to the n. If we want
to be more precise, we can say it's represented by this power series 4x between negative one
and one. We can think of the partial sums of this series sum of x to the n as a way
to approximate the function, one over one minus x with polynomials. Please pause the
video and write out the first few partial sums, your answers should have Xs. S sub zero
is just the zeroeth term one, S sub one is one plus x, and so on. s sub n is one plus
x plus all the way up through x to the n, an nth degree polynomial. In this figure,
I've drawn the function one over one minus x in blue. And I've drawn the first partial
sum the linear function one plus x in orange. Notice that these two functions are close
to each other when x equals zero, but get farther away from each other when x is far
from zero. In this graph, I've added the next partial sum s two, which is a degree two polynomial,
a quadratic. Here I've got partial sums through s four. And here I've got partial sums through
about s 12. The original function one over one minus x is here in blue on mark over Ed. And you can see that these partial sums are
becoming very good approximations to that original function on the interval from negative
one to one. Now outside that interval, for example, for x values below negative one, our partial sums deviate wildly from our original
function. I want to show one more graph. In this graph, the function one over one minus
x is shown in blue. And the graph of the power series, the sum of X to the N is shown in
orange, the blue function is actually obscured by
the orange function because the two functions are identical for values of x between negative
one and one. The only difference between these two functions, as discussed before, is that
the function one over one minus x is defined for all x values except for the x value of
one. And that's why we can see the blue graph even when x values are less than negative
one. However, the function given by this power series has domain in between negative one
and one, and so it only exists here in between those x values. In this video, I talked about
representing the function one over one minus x with the power series, the sum from n equals
zero to infinity of x to the n. These two progressions are equal for x values between
negative one where the power series converges. I also used a graph to give an idea of what
this equation means. The partial sums drawn in various colors give excellent approximations
to the original function drawn in blue on the interval of X values between negative
one and one. Since the partial sums are polynomials, this gives us a way to approximate this rational
function with simple polynomial equations. The idea of approximating functions with polynomials
is a very important idea that we'll see again and again. This video is about rewriting functions
in terms of power series. All the examples that we'll do in this section will be based
on the formula for the geometric series, the fact that the sum from n equals zero to infinity
of x to the n is equal to one over one minus x. For x between negative one and one. We
want to express the function two over x minus three as a power series. And we want to do
this by using the geometric sum formula. The trick here is going to be to rewrite to over
x minus three, so it looks more like one over one minus something, then we can treat whatever
that something is as x and plug into the formula to get a power series. So that's the idea.
Now I'm starting with two over x minus three. And I don't really like the X minus three,
I'd rather This was three minus x because that reminds me more of one minus
x. So I could rewrite it like this, but my two expressions now are equal. This one's
the negative of this one, so I can fix that by just sticking a negative sign out in front.
Now my two expressions are equal, because I've just multiplied my first expression by
negative one over negative one. To get this expression, but I still don't really like
the three minus x, I wish that were one minus x, it'd be nice if I could just divide the
three by three to get one. But in order to leave the expression on change, I'm going
to need to divide everything by three, both the top and the bottom. This gives me negative
two thirds, divided by three minus x over three, which I can also write as negative
two thirds times one minus x over three. Now if I bring the negative two thirds out front,
I have negative two thirds times one over one minus x over three. Using my geometric
sum formula, this is the same as negative two thirds times the sum from n equals zero
to infinity of x over three to the n, I'm just plugging in x over three 4x. In this
formula, I've now found a power series representation. But I'm going to clean it up a little bit
and make it look more standard, bring the negative two thirds into the summation sign
and distributed my exponent to get x to the n over three to the N. And now I can rewrite
this as negative two over three to the n plus one, times x to the n. To figure out the interval
of convergence for this power series, there are two different approaches that I could
take. First, I could do a standard computation using the ratio test. I'll let you work out
the details yourself. But you should get that the radius of convergence is three, and the
interval of convergence is from negative three to three. A second approach to finding the interval
of convergence is to look at the history of how we made the power series. Our basic template power series was the sum
from n equals zero to infinity of x to the n, which converges when x is between negative
one and one. We then plugged in x over three for x. Well, this good should converge when
x over three is between one and negative one. In other words, when x is between three and
negative three, finally, we multiplied that series by negative two thirds. This doesn't
change the interval of convergence. So the interval of convergence for our final power
series is the interval between negative three and three, just like you could have gotten
from the ratio test. As a second example, let's find a power series representation of
x over one plus 5x squared. Again, we want to use the geometric series summation formula.
So we want to make this expression look more like one over one minus something. Well, one
plus 5x squared is the same thing as one minus minus 5x squared. So if I just wanted a power
series for one over one plus 5x squared, I could do that easily by using the geometric
sum formula, and getting the sum from n equals zero to infinity of minus 5x squared to the
N. All I'm doing here is plugging in negative 5x squared for x in this formula. Since I
want a power series for x over one plus 5x squared, instead, I can just multiply everything
by x. Again, I'd like to clean things up and make this expression look more like a standard
power series. So I'll drag the x inside the summation sign, I can do that because the
summation is over n, which has nothing to do with x. Now I can use my laws of exponents
to rewrite this as negative one to the n five to the n times x to the two n. Now, x times
x to the two n is equal to x to the two n plus one. And so this gives me a good power
series representation for my function. Although the problem didn't explicitly ask for it,
it's a good idea to compute the interval of convergence to see for what values of x this equation actually holds. I'll use the
history approach. We started with our old familiar power series, which converges when
x is between one and negative one with plugged in net Get a 5x squared for x.
So that converges when negative one is less than negative 5x squared is less than one,
which is equivalent to the inequality 1/5 is greater than x squared, which is greater
than negative 1/5. Notice that I had to flip around the inequality signs when i divided
by negative five. Looking at a graph of y equals x squared, I can see that x squared
is between negative 1/5 and 1/5. For x values corresponding to this section of the graph
that I'm drawing here in green, or this interval of X values on the x axis that I'm drawing
in pink. To find the endpoints of this pink interval, I just need to find where x squared
is exactly equal to 1/5, which is when x is equal to plus or minus the square root of
1/5. So the x values that satisfy me and equality are the x values in between these two values,
I have negative the square root of 1/5 is less than x is less than the square root of
1/5. Now the last step in my history is when I multiplied everything by x, this doesn't
change my interval of convergence, which remains this interval here. In this video, I represented
several functions with power series using the geometric series summation formula. Although
only a limited class of functions can be handled using this formula, some of the techniques
that I used in the process, like multiplying my whole power series by x or plugging in
an expression for x, some of those techniques can be used in a much broader context to represent
many different kinds of functions as power series. As we'll see. Up to now, we've only
been able to calculate the sum of a few various specific series like geometric series and
some telescoping series. In this video, we'll see how to use Taylor series to find the sums
of other series. Let's start by finding the Taylor series for arc tan of x centered at
x equals zero. Since arc tan of x is equal to the integral of one over one plus x squared,
one easy way to find the Taylor series for arc tan of x is to build it up, starting with
the formula for a geometric series, one over one minus x is the sum from n equals zero
to infinity of x to the n. Now, one over one plus x squared is equal to one over one minus
negative x squared. So I can plug negative x squared in for x in this power series. And
I get the sum from n equals zero to infinity of negative x squared to the n, which simplifies
to the sum from n equals zero to infinity, negative one to the n x to the two n. Therefore,
arc tan of x, which is the integral of one over one plus x squared dx is going to be
equal to the integral of this power series, at least up to a constant, I can integrate
this power series term by term to get the sum of negative one to the n, x to the two
n plus one divided by two n plus one plus a constant. To figure out the constant C,
I can plug zero in for x on both sides of my equation. Since all of my powers of x involve
a positive power of x, even when n equals zero, I've got x to the one, so there's always
at least one copy of x there. So if I plug in x equals zero, all of these terms go to
zero, and arc tan of zero is also zero. So plugging in x equals zero gives me zero equals
the sum of a bunch of zeros plus C. In other words, the constant is zero. Therefore, this
expression right here gives me a Taylor series representation of arc tan. Let's take a moment
to figure out which x values this equation is actually true for. We know that the geometric
series formula holds for x values between negative one and one not including the endpoints.
Therefore, when I plug in negative x squared for x, I get In the equation that holds for
negative x squared between one and negative one, which is equivalent to saying that x
is between one and negative one. And when I take the integral of both sides,
I still get an equation that holds true for x between negative one and one. So I'm guaranteed
that this equation up here holds for x values between negative one and one. But in fact,
it's not hard to check that this series actually converges at the endpoints of negative one
and one. This follows from the alternating series test sets when we plug in x equals
negative one, or x equals one. Either way, we get an alternating series that converges.
So this series converges on the closed interval from negative one to one, and it's equal to
arc tan on that open interval. In fact, it turns out that is equal to our tan even on the closed interval. In particular,
the equation holds for x equal to one. When x is equal to one, that I plug into the equation
to get the arc tan of one is equal to the sum from n equals zero to infinity, negative
one to the n times one to the two n plus one, that's just one over two n plus one, I can rewrite that. Now, arc tan of one is
the angle whose tangent is one. So arc tan of one is going to be pi over four. In other
words, I now have a series that sums to pi over four, let's write out the first few terms
of this series and see what it looks like. The first term is one, the next term minus
a third, plus a fifth minus a seventh plus a ninth, and so on. In other words, multiplying
both sides by four, we get that pi is equal to four minus four thirds plus four fifths
minus four sevenths, plus four ninths, minus 4/11, and so on, if you've ever wondered how
to generate digits for pi, here's one way we found the sum of kind of a natural series
to look at. And we found a beautiful formula for pi. For the next example, let's start by finding
the Taylor series for f of x equals ln x centered at x equals one, we can write out the pattern
of the function and its derivatives. And we soon notice that the nth derivative will have
negative one to the n minus one times n minus one factorial times x to the n. Since we're
centering at x equals one, we'll plug in one and get the nth derivative of f at one is
equal to negative one to the n minus one times n minus one factorial. Therefore, the Taylor
series for ln of x will be the sum from n equals zero to infinity of f to the n at one
over n factorial, times x minus one to the n. Since this pattern for the nth derivative
of f really only works, starting with the first derivative, not with the zeroeth derivative,
I'm going to split out the first term, which is just going to be ln of one, which is actually
zero. And then all the other terms follow the same pattern. And we have negative one
to the n minus one, times n minus one factorial divided by the n factorial times x minus one
to the n. This simplifies to ln of x is equal to the sum from n equals one to infinity of
negative one to the n minus one times x minus one to the n over n. Since the n minus one
factorial cancels with almost all the n factorial leaving just the factor and in the denominator,
so I now have a formula for the Taylor series for ln of x. It's easy to check using the
ratio test that this power series has a radius of a convergence of one and so it converges
when x minus one is between one and negative one. It other words when x is between zero,
and two. And although I won't prove it here, it turns out that this Taylor series really
does converge to its function ln of x. And in fact, it converges to ln x on the interval
for x greater than zero and less than or equal to two. Now, if I plug in x equal to two into
my equation, I get something interesting. I get that ln of two is equal to the sum from
n equals one to infinity of negative one to the n minus one of two minus one to the n,
well, that's just one to the n, which is just one. And so I get ln f two is equal to the
sum of negative one to the n minus one over n. That should be looking familiar to you.
And yes, it's true. This is just the alternating harmonic
series, one minus one half, plus 1/3, minus 1/4, and so on. So Taylor series has given
us the sum of the alternating harmonic series, and it is ln of two. In this video, we use
Taylor series to find the sum of the alternating harmonic series. We also used Taylor series for arc tangent,
to find that the sum of a different series is actually equal to pi. As you get more familiar
with Taylor series, you'll be able to calculate the sum of other series by recognizing
them as the series that you get by plugging in a certain value of x into the Taylor series
of a particular function. For example, if you see the series one, plus one over two,
plus one over three factorial, plus one over four factorial, and so on, you might recognize
that as the number one plugged into the formula for the Taylor series of either dx, in other
words, this series is equal to either the one which is e. for any function f of x, whose
derivatives all exist, we can write down the Taylor series for f of x centered at x equals
a, by using this formula. But just because we can write the Taylor series down, doesn't
guarantee that the Taylor series actually converges to the function we started with.
In this video, we'll address the questions of When can we be sure that the Taylor series
converges to its function? And when the Taylor series does converge? How good is the approximation
by taylor polynomials? or partial sums? In other words, how big is the remainder? The
answer to the question, does the Taylor series always converge to the function that's made
from is unfortunately, no. Sometimes the radius of convergence is zero. And sometimes, even
though the radius of convergence is large, or even infinite, the Taylor series converges,
but it converges to the wrong function. Here's an example of the second situation. If we
look at this piecewise defined function, g of x is defined as e to the minus one over
x squared, if x is not zero, and is defined so that it's continuous at zero to be zero,
when x equals zero, it's possible to work out the value of g prime is zero, using the
limit definition of derivative, g prime of zero is the limit as h goes to zero of g of
zero plus h minus g of zero over h, which is the limit as h goes to zero of e to the minus one over h squared minus
zero over h. I'll rewrite this as the limit as h goes to zero of one over h divided by e to the one over h squared. as
h goes to zero from the positive side, this is an infinity over infinity indeterminate
form. And as h goes to zero from the negative side, is a negative infinity over infinity
indeterminate form. In either case, we can use loopy talls rule to replace this limit
with the limit of the derivatives, which simplifies to a zero over infinity kind of limit, which is equal to zero. In a similar way, it's possible to prove that
the second derivative of g zero is also zero, and so is the third derivative, and so are
all the derivatives of G at zero. Therefore, if we write out The Taylor series is just
the sum of a bunch of zeros or the zero function. Certainly this Taylor series converges for
all x, but it converges to the constant zero function. And that's different from the function
that we started with. In fact, the function that we started with g of x is not zero for
any x, except x equals zero. So the Taylor series
only matches the function at the single point x equals zero and nowhere else. We found an
example where the Taylor series converges, but not to its function g of x. Fortunately,
this behavior doesn't happen for most of the functions that we typically deal with. To
understand better, which Taylor series are guaranteed to converge to their functions,
let's take a look at the idea of remainders. For a function f of x as Taylor series T of
x, the remainder is written r sub n of x equals f of x minus T sub n of x, where T sub n of
x is the nth degree Taylor polynomial. This can be expanded out as follows. Previously,
when we looked at remainders for series, we wrote that the remainder was the infinite
sum, which I'll call s infinity, minus the nth partial sum. The analogous expression
for Taylor series might be the entire Taylor series, minus the first terms up through the
degree and term. But that's not what we define the remainder to be for Taylor series. Instead,
the remainder for Taylor series is the difference between the function and the first terms up
to the degree and term. The reason it's defined a little bit differently is because for Taylor
series, we're super interested in the Taylor series converging to its function. And it's
of less interest whether or not the Taylor series happens to converge to its infinite
sum. Because we define the remainder as the difference between the function and its Taylor
polynomial, it follows directly that the Taylor series for f of x converges to f of x and
an interval around a if and only if the limit of the remainders is zero in this interval,
to see this, just note that the limit as n goes to infinity of the Taylor series equals
f of x, that's what it means to converge to f of x. If and only if f of x minus this limit
is equal to zero. We can rewrite this as the limit as n goes to infinity of f of x minus
the limit as n goes to infinity of T n of x equals zero. Since the limit as n goes to
infinity of f of x is just f of x, there's no ends in this expression. Using limit laws,
we can rewrite this again, as the limit of the quantity f of x minus t and f of x equals
zero. But that's just the same thing as saying that the limit of the remainders is zero by
definition of remainders. So we restated the question about when does a Taylor series converge
to its function? As a question about when does the limit of the remainders equals zero? tailors in equality gives us a bound on these
remainders that can help us answer the question of when the remainders limit to zero. This
bound can also be a useful way to answer the question of how close is the approximation
when we use taylor polynomials to approximate a function. Here's some details about when
this bound holds. Suppose there's a number capital N, such that the n plus one derivative
of X has magnitude less than or equal to capital N, for all X's within a distance d of the
center a as a graph, this means that there's a number capital M. And for all X's within
a distance d of the center a, the graph of the n plus one derivative of f lies between negative m and m. So if such
a number M exists, then the remainder r sub n of x of the Taylor series satisfies the
inequality that the magnitude of r sub n of x is less than or equal to this bound capital
M divided by n one plus one factorial times the absolute value of x minus a to the n plus
one to power for all x's in this interval. of length two D that we're talking about.
Now, in the statement of Taylor's inequality, the number m can be chosen just to work for
a particular derivative. But really nice things can happen if we are able to choose the same
number of M to work for all derivatives for our values of little n. In fact, if all derivatives
are bounded by the same value capital M, then we can guarantee that the Taylor series converges
to the function. That gives us a nice practical convergence criterion that I'll show you on
the next slide. The practical convergence condition says that if there's a number capital
M, such that the magnitude of the nth derivative at x is less than capital M, for all numbers,
x and a certain interval around the center. And for all numbers, and then the Taylor series
for f of x converges to f of x 4x is in that interval. I represent the convergence condition
visually. This time, we're agreeing that all the derivatives are within this bound. So
the original function lies within this bound, and its derivative lies within this bound,
and the second derivative lies within this bound. These are not necessarily accurate
representations of the derivatives. But that's the idea. So as long as the bound holds for
all the derivatives, then the Taylor series converges to the function. And it's not too
hard to prove this practical convergence criteria. From Taylor's inequality. Remember that Taylor's
inequality says that, because of this bound, the nth remainder is bounded by M over n plus
one factorial times the absolute value of x minus a to the n plus one. But it's a fact
that the limit as n goes to infinity of M over n plus one factorial, times the absolute
value of x minus a to the n plus one is equal to zero. And it's not hard to prove this fact,
by looking at the series. And using the ratio test, to show that the
series converges, I'll leave that as an exercise for the viewer. Therefore, by the divergence
test, we know that the limit of the terms has to be zero, which is what we want. Now, because the limit of this expression
is zero, by the squeeze theorem, the limit of the our ends has to be zero as well, which
means that the Taylor series converge to the function. This practical convergence criterion
is a very good way to show that Taylor series converges to their function. But even if it
doesn't hold, it's still possible that the Taylor series may converge to its function,
or in some cases, it may not. Let's use this practical convergence condition to prove the
Taylor series for sine x converges to sine x. Recall the Taylor series for sine x is
given by this equation. And recall also that any nth derivative of x for f of x equals
sine x will have to be of the form sine x, or negative sine x, or cosine of x, or negative
cosine of x. That's simply because when we take repeated derivatives of sine and cosine,
the values cycle around in between those four possible answers. Now, since the absolute
value of sine x is always less than one, or equal to one and same thing for cosine, we
know that the nth derivative of our function has to be bounded by one, so we'll let m be
one. And this bound holds for all x values, all real numbers. Therefore, we know that
the Taylor series converges to the function sine of x. for all values of x. We've used
the practical convergence condition with M equals one to prove this. In this video, we
defined the nth remainder for a Taylor series as a difference between the function and its
nth Taylor polynomial. We also gave a bound on the size of the nth remainder. It's always
less than or equal to M over n plus one factorial times the value of x minus a to the n plus
one where M is a bound on the size of the n plus ones. derivative of x for x within
some distance d of a. Because of this formula for the remainder known as Taylor's inequality,
we can show that if the nth derivative of x is always bounded by the
same M for all x within a certain interval around a, and for all values of n, then the
Taylor series converge to its function. This video introduces the idea of parametric equations,
instead of describing a curve as y equals f of x, we can describe the x coordinates
and y coordinates separately in terms of a third variable t, usually thought of as time.
so we can write x as a function of t and y as a separate function of t. This is especially
useful as a way to describe curves that don't satisfy the vertical line test, and therefore
can't be described traditionally as functions of y in terms of x. A Cartesian equation for
a curve is an equation in terms of x and y only. parametric equations for a curve give
both x and y as functions of a third variable, usually T. The third variable is called the
parameter. That's our first example, let's graph the parametric equations given here
on an x y coordinate axis. We'll do this by finding x and y coordinates that correspond
to the same value of t. For example, when t is negative two, you can calculate that
x, I plug in negative two for t gives you five and y, when you plug in negative two
for t gives you eight. Please pause the video for a moment and fill in some additional values
of x and y. For some additional values of t. Your chart should look like this. And when
we plot the XY pairs and connect the dots, we get something like this. It says this point
over here corresponds to a T value of negative two. And this point over here corresponds
to the t value of two. So if we think of t as time, we're traversing the curve in this
direction, to find a Cartesian equation for this curve, we need to eliminate the variable
t from these equations. One way to do this is to solve for t and one equation, say the
first equation. So two t is equal to one minus x, which means that t is one half minus x
over two, then we can plug that expression for t into the second equation and get y equals
one half minus x over two squared plus four, which simplifies to the quadratic equation,
y equals 1/4 X squared minus one half x plus 17 fourths. Let's try some more examples.
A table of values for the first example helps us draw the familiar graph of a circle of
radius one. This should come as no surprise, since the equations x equals cosine t and
y equals sine t, are familiar from trig as a way of describing the x and y coordinates
of a point on the unit circle. Notice that when t equals zero, our curve lies on the
positive x axis. And as t increases from zero to two pi, we traverse the curve once in the
counterclockwise direction. A Cartesian equation for this unit circle is given by the equation
x squared plus y squared equals one. This follows from the trig identity cosine squared
t plus sine squared t equals one by substituting in X for cosine t, and y for sine t. Please
pause the video for a moment to graph the second curve and rewrite it as a Cartesian
equation. The table of values should help you see that the graph is again a unit circle.
But this time, as t increases from zero to two pi, we actually traverse the circle
twice in the clockwise direction. I'll draw this with a double arrow going clockwise The
Cartesian equation for this graph is still x squared plus y squared equals one. And so
we found two different parameterizations. For the same graph on the x, y axis. Let's take a look
at the third equation. There's no interval value specified for t here. So let's just
assume that t can be any real number. Now as T ranges from negative infinity to
infinity, our Y values, which are given by cosine t, oscillate between one and negative
one, our x values are always the square of our Y values. So the graph of this curve has
to lie on the graph of x equals y squared, which is a sideways parabola. But a parametrically
defined curve doesn't cover this whole parabola. Remember that y is given by cosine of t. So
y can only range between negative one and one. And so we're only getting the portion
of the parabola that I shade in here. As t varies from say, zero to pi, I traverse this
parabola one time. And then as t goes from pi to two pi, I go back again in the other
direction. And as T continues to increase, I traverse this parabola infinitely many times.
The Cartesian equation for this curve is the equation x equals y squared, with the restriction
that y is between negative one and one. We've seen several examples where we went from parametric
equations to Cartesian equations. Now let's start with a Cartesian equation and rewrite
it as a parametric equation. In this example, y is already given as a function of x. So
an easy way to parameterize. This curve is to just let x equal t. And then y is equal
to the square root of t squared minus t, substituting in T for x, the domain restriction in terms
of x just translates into a restriction in terms of t. I call this the copycat parameterization.
Since we have successfully introduced the new variable t, but T just copies, whatever
x does. In the second example, we could try setting x equal to t, then we get 25 t squared
plus 36, y squared is equal to 900. and solving for y, we'd have y squared equals 900 minus
25 t squared over 36. So y is plus or minus the square root of this quantity. This is
a very awkward looking expression. And fact, why is that even a function of t here because
of the plus and minus signs. So let's look for a better way to parameterize this curve.
Because of the x squared and the y squared, this equation is a good candidate for parameterizing
using sine and cosine. In fact, if we divide both sides of the equation by 900, we get
25x squared over 900 plus 36, y squared over 900 is equal to one, which simplifies to x
squared over 36 plus y squared over 25 is equal to one. If I rewrite this as x over
six squared plus Y over five squared equals one, then I can set x over six equal to cosine
of t, and y over five equal to sine of t. And I can see that for any value of t x over
six and y over five will satisfy this equation simply because cosine squared plus sine squared
equals one. This gives me the parameterization x equals six cosine of t, y equals five sine
of t, which is a handy way to describe an ellipse. As a final example, let's describe
a general circle of radius r, and center HK. For any point, x, y on the circle, we know
that the distance from that point x y to the center of the circle is equal to r. So using
the distance formula, we know that the square root of x minus h squared plus y minus k squared
has to equal Are squaring both sides. This gives us the equation for the circle in Cartesian
coordinates. So for example, if our circle has radius five, and has Center at the point
negative 317, then its equation would be x minus negative three, that's x plus three
squared plus y minus 17 squared is equal to 25. One way to find the equation of a general
circle in parametric equations, is to start with the unit circle and work our way up.
We know that the unit circle with radius one centered at the origin is given by the equation
x equals cosine t, and y equals sine t. If we want a circle of radius r centered around
the origin instead, then we need to expand everything by a factor of R. So we multiply
our x and y coordinates by R. If we now want the center to be at HK instead of at the origin,
then we need to add h to our x coordinates and add K to all our Y coordinates. This gives
us the general equation for a circle in parametric equations. to match the Cartesian equation
above, we can write our same example circle and parametric equations
as x equals five cosine t minus three, y equals five sine t plus 17. In this video, we translated
back and forth in between Cartesian equations and parametric equations
with a special emphasis on the equations for circles. This video is about finding the slopes
of tangent lines, for curves to find parametrically. To find
the slope of the tangent line, for a curve y equals p of x, given an ordinary Cartesian
coordinates, we just take dydx or equivalently, we calculate
p prime of x. If the curve is defined parametrically by the equations, x equals f of t, y equals
g of t. To find the slope of the tangent line, we still want to find dydx. But since our
curve is given parametrically, we don't have ready access to the y dx. Instead, we'll need
to calculate it from the Y DT and dx dt, which are easy to get from our parametric equations.
to relate dydx to d y DT and dx dt, we just need to use the chain rule. Recall that the
chain rule says that d y dt is equal to d y dx times dx dt. So rearranging, we know
that dou y dx is equal to d y DT divided by dx dt. And that's how we'll calculate the
slope of our tangent line, we can write this formula equivalently as d y dx is equal to
g prime of t over f prime of t. Now let's use these formulas in an example. For the
list as you figure given by these equations, and drawn below, let's find the slopes of
the tangent lines at the center point with x&y coordinates of zero. And let's find the
way the tangent line is horizontal. The slope of the tangent line is given by dy dx, which
is d y DT divided by dx dt. Now d y dt is going to be cosine of two t times two and
dx dt is going to be negative sine of t. Taking the ratio, we see that dydx is twice cosine
of two t over negative sine of t. Now we want to calculate this slope not when t is zero,
but when x and y are 0x is 01. cosine of t is zero, which is when t is
pi over two and three pi over two. Those are the only two values that work in the interval
of t values that we're interested in. And it's easy to check that when T has these values,
then y, which is sine of two t, is also going to be zero. So we want to calculate d y DT
at t equals pi over two, and at t equals three pi over two. plugging into our formula for
dydx, we get twice cosine of pi divided by negative sine of pi over two, which simplifies
to positive two. And when t is three pi over two, we get twice cosine of three Pi over
negative sine three pi over two, which simplifies to negative two. So our tangent lines at the
origin have slopes positive two, and negative two. Next, let's find where the tangent line
is horizontal. From the figure, there should be four places. If we set d y dx equals zero,
we get that two cosine of two t over negative sine of t needs to be zero, which means that
we need cosine of two t t equals zero, or two t, two equal pi over two, plus some multiple
of pi. Solving for T, we get that T has to equal pi over four, plus some multiple of
pi over two. There are indeed four such values of t in the interval from zero to two pi.
And those are pi over four, three Pi over four, five pi over four, and seven pi over
four, we can find the x and y coordinates of these points simply by plugging in these
values of t into our original equations. Here are the XY coordinates of those four points.
In this video, we saw that for a curve given by parametric equations, the slope of the
tangent line is given by D y dX, which is d y d t, divided by dx dt. In this video,
we'll find the area under a curve defined parametrically. Recall that the area under
a curve y equals p of x defined in usual Cartesian coordinates is just the integral from x equals
a to x equals b of y dx. Or, in other words, the integral from a to b of p of x dx. If
instead, the curve is given by the parametric equations, x equals f of t and y equals g
of t, the area is still going to be the integral of y dx. But now y can be written as g of
t, and dx is going to be f prime of t dt using differential notation. Therefore, the area is going to be the integral
of g of t, f prime of t, dt. And since we're integrating with respect to t, now, our bounds
of integration have to also be t values, I'll still call
them a and b, but I want them to represent t values here. It's important to note that
this is still the area under a curve. In other words, in between the curve and the x axis.
Let's use this formula to find the area enclosed by this list as you figure given by these
equations. by symmetry, it's enough to compute the area under one segment of the lisu curve,
and then multiply that area, which I'll call a bye for now, a is equal to the integral
of y dx. And using our parametric equations, we know that y is sine of two t, and dx is
the derivative of cosine. So that's negative sine of t dt. the rightmost point of the section
of curve that we're interested in Then right here happens when x is one and y equals zero,
it's easy to check that that occurs when t equals zero. The leftmost point of the section
of curve occurs when x and y are both zero, setting both our equations equal to zero and
solving for T, we see this happens when t is pi over two, plus any multiple of pi. So the first time
we reach this point, after the t value of zero is when t is simply pi over two. So we'll set our bounds of integration as
from t equals zero to t equals pi over two. plugging this information into our equation,
we get that the area is the integral from zero to pi over two of sine of two t times
negative sine of t dt. Let's pull the negative sign out and use the double angle formula
to rewrite sine of two t as two sine t cosine t, multiply that by the sine t dt, we can pull the two out and rewrite this as
sine squared of t cosine t dt. And then I use substitution will allow us to compute
the integral we get negative two times the integral from
u equals zero to one of u squared d u, which integrates to negative two u cubed over three,
evaluate between one and zero, which is negative two thirds. Notice I get a negative answer
here. And that's because I accidentally integrated from right and point to the left endpoint
instead of from the left to the right, I accidentally followed the t values in increasing order
when I should have integrated in the other order in order to make the x values in increasing
order. In any case, I can correct this by switching my bounds of integration, or more
quickly just by sticking a negative sign in front and changing my sign. Now I can figure
out the total area inside the list of geo figure just by multiplying by four. In this
video, we saw that the area underneath the curve given in parametric equations, is given
by the integral of y dx, which if x is f of t and y is g of t, this is just the integral
of g of t times f prime of t dt, our bounds of integration need to be t values. In this video, we'll calculate the length
of curves given by parametric equations. As a warm up, let's calculate the length of this
curve graph below. Since it's piecewise, linear, we can just calculate the length of each linear
piece using the distance formula. For example, the length of the first segment
is given by the square root of y two minus y one squared, that's three minus two squared
plus x two minus x one squared, that's two minus one squared, which gives us the square
root of two. Similarly, the second piece has length given by the square root of five minus
three squared plus three minus two squared, which is the square root of five, we can make
similar calculations for the length of the third segment and the fourth segment. adding
these together, we get a total length of twice the square root of five plus the square root
of two plus two. We can use the same process to approximate the length of any curve by
dividing it up into and small pieces, approximating each piece with a straight line and using
the distance formula to find the length of the line segments. If the curve is given by
the parametric equations, x equals f of t and y equals g of t. Then we can write each
of these points along the line in terms of f and g. For example, P of i minus one, we
can write as the x coordinate F. Have t minus one and the y coordinate g of t minus one.
And similarly, p II is going to be x coordinate f of t AI, y coordinate g of t AI. If we think
of t as time, then this is just saying that T sub i is the time at which we get to point
a piece of AI. Now, the distance formula tells us that the length of the line segment from
P sub i minus one to P sub i is going to be given by the square root of x two minus x
one squared. That's f of t sub i minus f of t sub i minus one squared plus y two minus
y one, that's g of t sub i minus g of t sub i minus one squared. Now, the total length of the curve, which
is called the arc length, is going to be approximately equal to the sum of the length of these segments.
This is starting to look a bit like a Riemann sum, but it's missing the delta t. So I'll
fix that by multiplying the numerator and the denominator by delta t. If I suck the
delta t from the denominator, inside the square root sign, it needs to become a delta t squared,
and I get the following expression. If I break up my fractions, I can rewrite this. Now there's
something kind of exciting going on this quotient here looks a lot like a slope. In fact, it's
exactly the expression for the slope of the secant line for the function f that we get
if we were calculating the derivative of f with respect to t. And similarly, this expression,
and here is exactly the expression for the slope of the secant line, we'd get if we were
calculating the derivative of g with respect to t. Because these quotients here, are approximately
equal to f prime and g prime, or more rigorously, because of the mean value theorem, I can replace
my expression with f prime of t i star squared, and g prime of t star squared, where ti star
is some time in the if time interval. Now exact arc length is going to be the limit
of this expression, as the number of intervals goes to infinity. As usual, I can replace
the limit of this Riemann sum with an integral where the bounds of integration are the t
values that get me from the start of the curve to the end of the curve. This arc length formula
has an alternative form, which is the integral from a to b of the square root of dx dt squared
plus d y dt squared, dt. And these are my two versions of this very useful formula for arc length. Now let's use this
formula to set up an integral to express the arc length of this list as you figure since dx dt is given by negative sine of t.
And the Y dt is given by two cosine of two t, our Clank is given by the integral of the
square root of sine of t squared plus two cosine of two t squared dt, we do still need
to figure out the bounds of integration in terms of t. That will make us wrap around
this curve exactly one time. It's easy to check that when t equals 0x is equal to one
and y is equal to zero. So we're at this point right here. The next time that we get to this point, with
an x coordinate of one, we need x equal cosine t to equal one. So the next time will be when
t equals two pi. Therefore, our bounds of integration are going
to be from zero to two pi. It's easy to set up This integral, but it would be very difficult
to actually integrate it. And that's often the case with our clients. But we could use
a calculator or a computer to get a numerical approximation of about 9.4. In this video,
we derive an equation for arc length. This video introduces the idea of polar coordinates.
Polar Coordinates give an alternative way of describing the location of points on the
plane. Instead of describing a point, in terms of its x and y coordinates, those are the
Cartesian coordinates of the point. When using polar coordinates, we instead describe the
point in terms of radius r, and an angle theta, r is the distance of the point from the origin,
and theta is the angle that radius line makes with the positive x axis. Let's plot these
points given in polar coordinates. So the eight here is the value of the radius, and
the negative two thirds pi is the value of the angle theta. The negative angle means
that I need to go clockwise from the positive x axis, instead of counterclockwise like I
normally would for a positive angle. So here, a negative two thirds pi means that I need
to go to this line right here. And the eight of for the radius means I need to go eight
lines out from the origin. So my point should be around right here. The next point has a
radius of five and an angle of three pi. The angle of positive three pi means that I go
counterclockwise starting at the positive x axis, here, I've gone around by two pi.
And here, I've got an extra pi to make three pi. Now the radius of five means I need to
go five units out from the origin. So that puts me about right here. Notice that I could
have also labeled this point with the polar coordinates of five Pi, there's more than one way to assign
polar coordinates to a point. The next point has an angle of pi over four,
and a radius of negative 12. The negative radius means that I need to jump to the other
side of the circle before I plot the point. In other words, instead of plotting the point
at an angle of pi over four and a radius of 12, which would be about right here, I go
to the opposite side of the circle, and plotted at the same distance from the origin, but
180 degrees or pi radians around the circle over here. Now I could have also labeled this
point using a positive radius of 12. And using an angle of pi over four plus pi, or five
pi over four. And in general, a point with polar coordinates of negative r theta means
the same point as the point with polar coordinates r, theta plus pi. Adding pi just makes us
jump around to the opposite side of the circle. To convert between polar and Cartesian coordinates,
it's handy to use the following equations. First, x is equal to r cosine theta, y is
equal to r sine theta r squared is equal to x squared plus y squared, which means that
R is plus or minus the square root of x squared plus y squared. And tangent theta is equal
to y divided by x. Let's see where these equations come from. If we draw a point with coordinates,
x, y, and draw lines to make a right triangle, the height of that triangle is y. The length
of the base is x. And the high partners has length R. Theta is the measure of this interior
angle. From trig, we know that cosine theta is equal to adjacent over hypotenuse, so that's
x over r, which means that x is equal to r cosine theta. Similarly, sine theta is opposite
over hypotenuse. That's why over R, which means that y is equal to r sine theta. That
gives us the first two equations the batang orien theorem tells us that x squared plus
y squared is equal to r squared. And that gives us the third equation. Finally, tangent
theta is opposite over adjacent. So that's y over x, which is the fourth equation. To convert five, negative pi over six, from
polar to Cartesian coordinates, we just use the fact that x equals r cosine theta, and
y equals r sine theta. So in this case, x is equal to five times cosine of negative
pi over six, that's five times square root of three over two, and y is equal to five,
sine negative pi over six. So that's equal to negative five halves, did convert negative
one negative one from Cartesian to polar coordinates, we know that negative one and negative one
are x and y values. So we need to use the fact that r squared is x squared plus y squared,
that is r squared is negative one squared plus negative one squared, or two. Also, tangent
theta is y over x, so that's negative one over negative one, or one. Now there's several
values of r and theta that satisfy these equations are could be squared of two, or negative the
square root of two, and theta could be Pi over four, or five pi over four. Or we could
add multiples of two pi to either of these answers. But not all combinations of r and
theta, get us to the right point. The point with Cartesian coordinates negative one negative
one lies in the third quadrant. But if we use a theta value of say pi over four and
an R value of square root of two, that would get us to the first quadrant. So instead,
we need to use the polar coordinates of square root of two and five pi over four. Or if we prefer, negative
square root of two, and pi over four. We could also add any multiple of two pi to either
of these values of theta, and get yet another way of representing the point and polar coordinates.
This video talked about polar coordinates and converting in between Cartesian coordinates
and polar coordinates using some familiar equations from trig. 

Transcript for: Linear Algebra - Full College Course
Could not get transcript of Linear Algebra - Full College Course: 
Could not retrieve a transcript for the video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnTa9XtvmfI! This is most likely caused by:

Subtitles are disabled for this video

If you are sure that the described cause is not responsible for this error and that a transcript should be retrievable, please create an issue at https://github.com/jdepoix/youtube-transcript-api/issues. Please add which version of youtube_transcript_api you are using and provide the information needed to replicate the error. Also make sure that there are no open issues which already describe your problem!

Transcript for: College Algebra  Full Course with Python Code
This college algebra course is different than other college algebra courses. Like many other ones, you will be learning all the concepts from an experienced university professor. But in this course, the instructor Ed Protowski will also show you how to implement all the concepts in Python. This course is for everybody, but especially those interested in computer science. Hello and welcome to the Algebra with Python course. My name is Ed and I'll be your guide on this adventure. So we're going to learn about algebra and how to write Python code to do all of your algebra. Because there's so many different things that you can do with formulas. You learn these formulas. Hey, anytime you have a formula, you can write code to use it. So that's what we're going to do. We're going to write some code using the Google CoLab notebook. That's Python, a Jupyter notebook, essentially in your Google Drive. So one of the next things we'll do is look at how to set that up. We're going to go through each unit. We're going to look at the math. We're going to look in the actual lessons. I'll be writing things on the board and we'll look at the concepts, how to do the math on the board. And then we'll look at then how to write the code to do this. And you'll be able to create your own CoLab notebooks. In fact, I hope you do create your own notebook or two along the way, building your own resources that you can use. You can also, you know, once we set it up, you can also actually download the CoLab, the Google CoLab app, and you have access to each of these notebooks on your phone. So, you know, you can make your own like, you know, super calculator that you have access to on your phone, you know, solve all kinds of things, you know, and that's great. You know what, you know, building these resources, but also understanding how to use them so that as you go further in math and in writing code and eventually leading up to, you know, working in data science, that you really understand these concepts and you know how to use all the formulas that you're creating. So that's really, that's the idea. That's what we want to do. And each unit is going to be a lot like this. I'm going to talk about the math, you know, we'll do some things on the board and then we'll flip it and we'll look at how to do that with code. I'll include all the resources for you. And then in addition to the core concepts in each unit, the next thing, then what we'll do is I'll have another video or two of extra working through the problems. So, you know, you know how to write the code, you're building your resources, and then we'll just work through a bunch of extra problems, you know, putting this into practice. And it'll be really great. You know, you'll learn algebra, you'll learn code, and you'll have all these skills under your belt that you can use for a lot of other things. And we're going to build upon these in future courses. So I hope you enjoy. Okay, so let's look at how to set up Google CoLab in your Google Drive. So in your Google Drive, hopefully you have it organized in folders and, you know, you have a, you'll set up a folder for this course. That way, you know, you can have all the documents and notebooks and everything there, just like I have here, and you will have access to all these documents you see, you know, soon enough. So if we take a look at the little yellow infinity symbol, that's the Google CoLab. And, you know, if you want to create a new Google CoLab, you're in the folder where you want it to be, click on new, and it won't be here, and you go to more, and then it'll be down here. So Google CoLab. Now, if you don't have it already, if you have not yet set it up, then you go down to connect more apps. And, you know, it's begins at C, it might show up, you know, here. But if not, then you can search, you know, and look at this like CoLab, even if you just do Co, it comes up. But if you type in CoLab, then it'll come up. There we go. And again, mine's already installed. But if it wasn't, you'd see it there, you click on it. And this blue button, instead of saying uninstall, it would say install. And then you'd have have it available. And there we go. Then when you go to new, and then you can go to Google CoLab laboratory, and it loads. There you go. So as you see, I like the dark theme for CoLab. So that's just the one, that's just what I picked. You know, you can change that. So this little block here, this is where you're going to write the code, you know, it's set up to write a block of code. And in addition to that, you have the ability to add more code or more text. So you see, you can add another block of code, you can add more text. And if you click up there, it just adds it in line. And, you know, if you type text, now, if I hit enter, that just gives me a new line, I have to click somewhere else to get out of that. So there you go, you can add code or text by doing that. Also, if you might have noticed this appear, if you hover around the middle, you can add code or text. And that works anywhere. You see, so you can add, you know, text right here, in between these two. And there we go. And that text actually, besides writing text, you can actually use some a few HTML tags to, you know, make new line breaks, or some things like that. And then if you get really fancy, you can use the latex math notation to display different math formulas. But we'll get to that soon enough. Alright, so you have all these different things you can do, you know, your code, your text. And one of the other things you want to do first, like any document, give it a name. And you'll notice the familiar setup compared to other Google Docs, you can, there we go. Let's just call this week one example. All right, so, you know, give it a name, you know, you don't want to leave all your stuff just untitled, might be, you might forget, and it might be hard to find later. And you can write your code there, whatever you'd like to put in there, print. Okay. And, you know, there we go. It just sits there as code until you run it. And you can click this run button, or if you're familiar with the Jupiter notebooks, you can hit shift enter, that'll run it also. And there we go. This, this is the output here. Notice you can also do a lot of math right there in the print statement. So if you just put in math formulas, you see hit enter, it just gives you a new line, run it. You can do all sorts of math formulas. And remember, the add, subtract, multiply, divide, that all works, that's built in. The, the exponent would be this asterisk, two of them. So there you go. So that would be three to the fourth power. And you see it'll, it'll do the math right there. If you wanted to do something like square root, you have to import something. And we'll get to imports as we go through a lot of this. But notice you can, you know, you can have your text, you can have, do your math for, for a lot of simple things. You can just do that right in the print statement. One of the other interesting things you can do is, and if I make this, I'll just make that B for a certain reason, then you have a table of contents here. Now this has nothing because I don't have any headings or sections. So that's what the table of contents looks for. If you click on a new section, then you can, I'll just leave it as new section and call it good right there. You see it shows up in the table of contents. And if you double click, now this B is underneath that section. So if I click on this arrow, it becomes minimized within that section. And then here, A, if I want to make this its own section, then take a look at the section heading. If I double click on it, it's that hashtag that would be normally used for a Python comment, but we're, but we're in the comment. It would be normally used for a Python comment, but since we're in the text part, then you would just use it to indicate a new section. So I can go up to here, this text, and I can make it a new section. You probably don't need the space, but I like it. And again, click somewhere else to get out of that. So now I have A and I have my new section here. So I can do some different things. I can put some, I can put some code here and I can, in this code, I can move it up. See the arrow over there? I can move it up. And then maybe I'll make B, double click on this, and maybe I'll make B its own section. I'll click somewhere else. And so I can have all these sections and now B is its own section. That kind of didn't matter because I don't have anything underneath of it. There we go. Put text in here, click somewhere else, and then I can collapse it. So you see, I can have these different sections collapsed, and then they all show up in the table of contents, A, new section, B. So if you give them names more than A, then you're going to have them more than A and B. It becomes useful because you can find them in the table of contents. And then you just click to expand each section in whatever else. And you can have, within the section, you can have code, text, you know, and as many of those blocks as you want. And that section goes until you create a new section. So some good useful things you can do in building your own Google CoLab notebooks. You might decide that you might like that as a way to organize them, you know, keep them in sections. So that helps. Also, the Google CoLab, like everything else in the Google Drive, it does save automatically, but it doesn't do it as often. So you do have a file and you do have a save here, and also the normal shortcuts, Ctrl S, or Command S. So that does work. And that way, sometimes, you know, if it goes a while in between saving, if you try to close it, it might actually prompt you to say that you might need to save it. So that's just something to think about. You know, you actually do actually make an effort to save things here in the Google CoLab. So we set up our code. We can do math right there in the print statement. We set up our sections, table of contents, and all these sections, you know, within the view, you can actually expand or collapse them all at once if you want. You know, that's kind of interesting. And through all the code we're going to work on, you know, you also have down here one of the other things that looks like, you know, XML or HTML tags, and it's a bunch of code snippets that you can use, you know, copy and paste, try these right in your Google CoLab right here. So some pretty cool things to explore. And there we have it. You're going to be building your Google CoLab notebooks. You might want to build one for algebra and, you know, just continually add to it, in this, in which case, definitely make sections because that's going to be a helpful table of contents to find what you want. So you could do that. You could make a different notebook, you know, for each unit or each week or however you want to organize it. But then the idea is you're building these resources that you will have access to. And as well as installing it on the Google Drive, you can also download and install the app. So that'll be useful. Have it on your phone. That when you first run it, you need to do a few things to go through setting it up, you know, authentication and such. But, you know, it doesn't take that long. All right, so we have this, you're going to be building your stuff in your Google, in your Google CoLab and it's going to be exciting. We'll get to a lot of, a lot of interesting things. So let's get into the math next. So we can't talk about proportions without talking about ratios. And ratio is another word for a fraction. So this two out of four, I can write that as, well, two out of four, but I could say two fourths. I can call it a fraction, but it's also a ratio. And then a proportion is two equal ratios. So if I know that these are equal, then there's other things I can do with this. And one of the things that works and becomes very useful is cross multiply. So if these two are equal ratios, then I can cross multiply, multiply the diagonals. I can do two times 10 equals four times five. And that's another way to write this. So then I can get it out of the proportion mode and I can use this to double check or I can solve for things. So two times 10, we see 20 equals 20 and then that's true. So, you know, we confirm that that works. We can always do this. If these were other numbers, I can check to see if this really is true cross multiplying, because if that doesn't work, then that wouldn't be true. And I can also use it if one of these numbers is unknown. So if I have three out of six equals X out of four. Now there's other ways to solve this, but this is the go-to way because it works every time. So when I do my when I do my cross multiplying, then I can do this three times four is 12 equals six X. So there we go. Three times four is 12 and then six times X is six X. And then I know that the next step I'm going to do is going to be dividing by six. So then I get that X equals two. Now in doing that, we can jump ahead and say, okay, let's I know that when I multiply this diagonal, I can picture this step. It's going to be six X. So the next thing I'm doing is dividing by six. So a lot of times we just put this in one step. So I multiply the diagonal that I can divide by the other number because I know that the next step and then my answer is X. So we can really make use of this in writing code. I can see the proportion and I can then just put this all in one step to solve for X. And again, that's it's the go-to way it works every time. So I can write code to then prompt for these numbers, cross multiply and then solve for X. One of the ways this is also useful is some of the other applications. If I have, let's say I'm converting something like miles to kilometers. So if I have one mile is about 1.6 kilometers, then I can set this up. This is the ratio that I know. So as long as I have miles and then kilometers, then if I know one, I can figure out the other. This unknown can be either place. So if I have two miles, then how many kilometers is that? You see, we can make use of this. I know that I'm cross multiplying two times 1.6 divided by one. And then, so there we go. So X would be 3.2. And again, multiplying the diagonal that I can, two times 1.6 dividing by the other number, which in this case, it's convenient that it's one. So then I can solve. So this is what we're going to use. And we're going to take a look at how to put this into code. And so prompt for these four numbers or three of them, and then figure out the fourth one. So let's take a look at how that'll happen. So let's take a look at the code. So we're going to see here how much easier it is to write some code to solve some of our problems. And just like proportions, we have that cross multiplying that we know works every time. So I'm going to put just a display here to remind us that we're setting up the proportion. And here's what it looks like. N1, D1 equals N2 over D2. So N for numerator, D for denominator. And if I have a proportion, I would know one of the ratios. So I would know, let's say N1 and D1. And then N2 or D2, one of those I would not know, but I would know the other one. So I have my comment here in the code, put a zero in for the unknown value, because realistically, none of these values would be zero. That would just, you know, you wouldn't even need to think hard about that, that zero is everything out, or if it's in the denominator, it's undefined. So that would never occur in something that we're really trying to solve. So I would know N1 and D1, and I would just change these numbers, put in my numbers that I know, and I'll put a zero in for the one I don't know. And then I'll put two if statements. So I have if N2 equals zero. And there we go. Notice the setup of the if statement in Python. If N2 at the double equals, because I'm testing it, I have a colon. And then the indentation afterward is one, two, three, four spaces, I would hesitate some people use a tab, I would hesitate to not use a tab. They don't often give you the right number of spaces. So indent four spaces. And then I have the answer is, and I'm going to just do that cross multiplying. So you see D2 times N1 divided by D1, that cross multiplying that we that we know, and then we'll print out the answer. And we'll do the same thing here. If it's D2 that I don't know, so my if statement, if D2 equals zero, colon, four spaces indent, and then this answer, notice the cross multiplying. So D2 is what I don't know. So I'd be doing N2 times D1 divided by N1. And then I'd print out that answer. So there we go. And then given these one over two equals what over 16. And then if I would run this, and it will output the answer right here. There we go. N2 equals eight. Or if I had this, I'll keep this and maybe I'll put this one as zero. Rio, and if we run it, there we go. Really straightforward. We want to get to this point that we know these we know these formulas, and we can just put something in here, maybe even display something to set it up, and cross multiply, solve any proportion this way. Now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit, let's look through some extra problems. And I'm going to work through extra problems using the CoLab notebook. So you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life. So we're going to go through some more extra problems here. We're going to work through some extra problems here relating to some things that might come up in working with proportions and ratios. And one of the things that comes up, we work with mixed numbers. And in math, I might write it like this, but then you think, how could I do this in Python? And Python, remember, you can even do math in the print statement. So you could put this as one and two thirds becomes one plus two thirds, and you see two divided by three. Notice I didn't even, sometimes I use parentheses, extra parentheses, but we really don't, Python knows order of operations. So you could have one plus two thirds, plus three and four thirds. So it'd be plus three plus four divided by five. And, you know, you can change up minus seven. You can put that all in a print statement there and it would output the answer. Now, later on in the third unit, we're going to also talk about converting that output. If it was a weird decimal into a fraction or mixed number, but we'll get to that. So you can do this, but even also at this point, you could, if you wanted to, instead of print and you don't need the parentheses, but I'll just keep them there, you can store them as a variable. So if you had something that you wanted to store as a variable and then use that later on, or any one of these, you know, convert a mixed number stored as a variable, because some of these, like two thirds, that will come out as a mixed number, mixed number, or the one and two thirds that will come out as that repeating decimal. Well, later on, you might want to keep as many of those decimal places as possible and storing it as a variable will do that for you without you having to write down all the decimals. So really, that's the whole thing. We're trying to build, you know, for all the different times, you might use a calculator. Hey, might as well use Google CoLab because you can have all these formulas in there, store variables and everything. So for all the different times, you might need to work with mixed numbers. Yeah. Print it out, store it as a variable and continue on and work with the rest of the problem. So if this comes out as a repeating variable, let's take a look at one other thing here. If this comes out, so let's just say I have that one and two thirds. So we know the one, but if I look at the two thirds, you know, that would be, you know, 0.6 and it keeps repeating. You know, it'll keep repeating. If you get output like this, how would you know that that would be two thirds? Well, one of the ways you can do this is we can throw in some other variables here. Let's call, let's call this X. So X is all these repeating decimals. So if it repeats each, um, each place, then I just need to multiply it by 10. You see, and that keeps going because if this keeps going and then this keeps going, then if I subtract them 10 X minus one X, so that would be nine X equals six. Now notice I did not rewrite it, but I am subtracting this bottom row minus the top row because then all these decimal places line up and it would subtract. So multiplying it by 10 moves it over. Now I have six points something and when I subtract 10 X minus one X is nine X, then that all cancels. And if I have nine X, how do I get to X divide both sides by nine? So we get six over nine, which we know then mathematically we can reduce divided by three is two divided by three is three. And actually this works, any single digit that repeats is a factor of nine. So if I have, um, if I have anything else, and actually I might use the same, same formula, but if I have anything else, like if I have, um, um, point four and it's a four that keeps repeating. So then 10 times that would be four point and as many fours as you want. So then when we subtract 10 X minus X is nine X. And then when I subtract this, everything after the decimal subtracts. And so your answer is four and divide by nine X equals four over nine. Now, so this works for any number one, one through nine, but this is kind of interesting then, um, how, what if you get a point nine repeating? Because would that be then nine over nine? Yes, maybe. So if I have point nine repeating, and so then 10 times that would be nine point and as many nines as you want, we'll do the same thing. So nine X equals, so you see if this is point nine repeating, this still follows 10 times that. And then when we subtract, it all lines up, it becomes nine X equals nine over nine, which is one. So you see some algebra acrobatics. How do I show that point nine, nine, nine repeating equals one? And these are kind of the things that we want to bring in. Um, some of the other things that we can do, you know, this works out nicely just seeing it on the board. But later on, as we do different things to convert decimals to fractions, you can see that it'll work in the code too. But yeah, some math acrobatics, this is kind of what we want to be able to do. We want to also sometimes use the code to show different ways to get to solutions. And when we see it get to a solution in different ways, it kind of like reproves, Hey, this works. This is the true solution. So these are some of the things that we can do, um, with proportions and, um, you know, some of the other things we'll do, we, you know, we could look at like converting, um, convert converting, uh, money like. Yeah. So if I have, you know, let's say, um, you know, one U S dollar is right now, I just looked this up. It's 1.29 Canadian dollars. So if I want to convert, then I can set up my ratio and proportion as long as you know, I know one of these, so I know the ratio. And then as long as I know one of these, I can figure out the other. And in the code, you remember, we just add it, whichever one I want to figure out, I put a zero there because either way zero over anything is zero. So that would not apply here. You know, the zero in the numerator, the answer is zero and zero in the denominator would be undefined. You know, you could look up different, uh, images of divide by zero online, you know, things like going into the abyss and all kinds of fun things like that. But yeah, we don't want to divide by zero. So if I know one of these and neither of these would be zero, that just really would, we would never arrive at that situation. So, you know, we saw that that's why we would put a zero in for the one we want to know. And there we go. As long as we have it set up, you know, then I can figure out, oh, okay. Well, in that case, you know, um, how many, I'll put the question mark here since we're not in the code, you know, okay, if one U S is 1.29 Canadian, then what's one Canadian hour worth. And then you see cross multiply divide by 1.29 and you'll get that exchange rate. So that's how we can change it from unit to this one, one U S to how many Canadian, we can change it to one Canadian to how many U S you know, cause very often you find exchange rates and they'll give you it in one direction. And maybe you want to find it in the other direction. So these are some things you can use this for. We can also do things like miles to kilometers or, or whatever, you know, other unit conversion you want, but you know, if you have one mile is 1.6 kilometers, um, it's that exactly 1.6, you know, there's like, you know, another nine meters or something, but okay. And then there we go. If I want to convert then as long as I have miles and I have kilometers, then it'll work out. And we looked at how to put that in the code. So now that you have these tools, you can convert anything. As long as you have that ratio of one aspect of it, then you can, you know, plug in one of these two numbers and figure out the other. So, you know, here, you know, some, some of the good things, and these are some of the things we want to do in the extra practice section. You'll see this come up in every unit that, you know, we're going to get to the core, um, core skills in those units are going to build your ongoing, uh, CoLab notebook. So you have some resources and then we'll have an extra practice, um, extra practice, extra problem section where we then use some of the things that you've created and let's apply this and let's solve a bunch of extra problems. So there we go. Um, and we will, uh, we'll go on to the next unit. Here, we're going to look at four different ways to solve for the unknown number. And in algebra, we often call this X just because X works nicely, X marks the spot. So if I have, I had to put four different situations here, add, subtract, multiply, divide. So I put simple numbers because you might be able to do this in your head to see the answer, but the algebra explanation is you want to see what you're doing and do the opposite. So then if these two sides are equal, both sides of the equal sign, if you do the same thing to both sides, then they stay equal. So that works. What am I doing? I want to do the opposite to cancel things out. Then the next thing is do the same thing to both sides of the equal sign. I'm going to show this with the four different algebra operations here. So if we have X plus three equals five, so in each time, the goal is that I get X equals something. So I would like that X by itself on that side, on the left side of the equal sign. So what am I doing? I'm adding three. So I want to do the opposite, subtract three, and then I'm going to do the same thing to the other side. And three minus three is zero. I don't have to write plus zero. Five minus three is two, solved. X equals two. So it's like Sherlock Holmes eliminating possibilities, and then we get to the answer. So the next one, if I'm subtracting, I'm going to do the opposite. So again, my goal is X equals something. So X minus two, if I add two, that cancels. That's why I add two, and then I do the same thing to the other side. So negative two plus two is zero. Don't have to write plus zero. Have to write plus zero. And then 10 plus two is 12. There we go, solved. We go to multiplying, very similar. Also notice in writing math, most textbooks, you won't see the fact that you won't see a multiplication symbol at some point. Just the fact that they're next to each other means that I'm multiplying. Now we have to remember this in Python syntax, you have to put that multiplication symbol. But here three X means three times X. So to get X by itself, I'm multiplying, so I have to want to divide. And notice I'm going to write that like a fraction, divided by three, and then divided by three here. Now here's something else about the notation. Three divided by three is one, but I don't have to put one X. You could, but you don't have to. In most places, you won't see it. One X. Any other number there, I'd have to write the number, but one, we often don't write that. So then 12 divided by three is four. And we go here, X divided by four. Somehow, whatever I teach this, everybody's like, get it, get it, get it. Confused. It's the same thing. I'm dividing. So I'm going to do the opposite, which is multiply. Now in this case, I might write it, how can I write multiplied by four? I might even just put it in parentheses, just saying it's next to that, so that means I'm multiplying. That's one way to put it. And so here I'll put in parentheses. So divided by four times four cancels out, so it's one, and then that's one X. And then here, two times four is eight. So with some simple numbers that we see these methods here, add, subtract, multiply, and divide. And the key is no matter what the numbers, no matter what else you encounter, how complicated the numbers are, it's the same method. So we recognize this method, then whatever number comes up, then we can figure this out. Because this I can do in my head, but supposing I have instead of X plus three, supposing I have X plus 7.2 equals 11.1 or something like that. So supposing I have something like this, how could I solve it? Oh, I have an algebra method. What am I doing? I'm subtracting, in this case, 7.2 from both sides. And so then I get X equals, and even if it was something more complicated, I know what I'm doing on the calculator. I'm subtracting 11.1 minus 7.2, and then I know what I'm doing on the calculator. There we go. So we can also use this anytime I have a two-step equation. And in the two-step equations, it's more like order of operations in reverse, because the addition is the easiest. So if I have something like 4X plus 6 equals 22, so two steps, I'm still going to combine those same four steps we were talking about. I'm just going to do one than the other. And I'll look at the addition. Like I said, like order of operations in reverse, the addition or subtraction is going to be the easiest to do first. If I then subtract 6 from both sides, so if I have minus 6, minus 6, so then I have 4X equals 16. And now I get to my second step, divide by 4, divide by 4, divide by 4, divide by 4, then I get X equals 4. So we have our two-step equation. And in all this, some of these are, you're going to get quick enough at this that it's not even worth trying to write code or anything to solve this. But some of these, as they get more difficult, then it will, and there's other factoring and more elaborate problems, then it would be worth it to write code because I'll show you now how we can just put this in Python, write out the equation, and it'll output the answer. So let's take a look at the code. So it's a lot easier to solve for X in Python because we can just import the Sympy library here. And that's the symbolic math library. You don't have to install anything. You can just import it. Google Colab works nicely behind the scenes like that. And then from Sympy, we're going to import symbols. And from Sympy.solvers, we're going to import solve. So we can import symbols to use X as a math symbol and solve for that. And solve is going to be the function we use. So we see here, then I'll define X equals symbols X. And that's defining that X is the variable we're solving for. I just put this comment here. But then the next thing we have, I define this variable eq equals X minus two. And this is the function set equal to zero. So it's X minus two equals zero is what we're solving for. And then that's the equation. So then I just put it in a print statement, print X equals, and Python syntax, then print that exactly, comma, and then our answer. And here's where we see solve eq, the equation, and use X as the variable. So we're going to solve that X minus two equals zero. And you see it outputs X equals two. It'll print an array of whatever your answer is. This just had one answer. But if I had something like X, X squared, X squared minus two, now that'll give me a square root answer. Kind of interesting how that'll show up. You see square root of two, rather than try to make that a decimal. But if we make this something that works out nicely to an integer, and we run that, see it'll give me an array of my two answers. X squared minus four equals zero is the equation. And negative two or positive two, either one works. And remember, then, if I have something like two X, I can't just write two X. I have to put, I have to put two times X, because that's Python syntax. Two X minus four. And then if we run that, there we go. It'll solve that. There we go. Much easier. And all this stays the same. You just put your equation here, and run it, and you can solve anything. Just make sure it's that equation set equal to zero. Now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit, let's look through some extra problems. And I'm going to work through extra problems using the Colab notebook. So you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building, and use these to solve the problem. You can use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life. So we're going to go through some more extra problems here. All right. So let's go a little bit deeper, looking at different ways we can solve for X here, using Python code. And here is the code that we were talking about before. So we import Sympy, so we can use our symbols, and then we're still from Sympy, import symbols, and some Sympy.solvers. And here I'm just going to define that symbol X. And this is the simplest thing. We can have all of this code, and I can just put my equation right here. Here's my equation. And then I can solve that equation, and I'm solving for X. Notice I don't even really need a print statement, as long as this solve function is the last thing there. And then when we run it, we see it will give this negative 1 half. And notice the brackets around it, because it's a finite set. Nice. Solve. Pretty easy. And if I have something that solves for even, you know, something more complex, like 2X squared plus 1. Now this is setting this equal to zero. So 2X squared plus 1 actually won't have a real solution. We can actually take a look at that. And you see the negative square root of I, and that is I, the imaginary number. So it will give us this. There's other ways to make that square root display in a better way, but we'll get to that later. And there we go. But we see, you know, it gives us two solutions as this finite set of these two. And if I were to make it, you know, minus 1, or I can even make it minus, you know, 4, we'll have two real solutions there. But there's still going to be square root solutions. There we go. Different ways that this will output. But you get this. You can put the equation in there and see the answer. It'll solve pretty much anything you can type in there. All right. But let's start making this a little bit fancier. What if we prompt for input? So let's say I want this to be, you know, somewhere else, and rather than somebody going in and finding that correct line and putting the code there, we can just prompt for the input here. And notice the function is input, and then it's going to display this. Enter equation. And I even have it as zero equals to remind the person that it must be equal to zero. You could add another print statement saying make sure x is the variable, you know, if that's what you'd like. And this input does come in as a string. But the fact that we are using these symbols, it will be able to interpret that. And here then we're solving and just putting that into a print statement. There we go. So we have this prompts you enter the equation. And maybe I just make it three x minus six. How about that? There we go. Something good. One solution. Three x minus six, because if x is two, then that works. Okay, that's great. But again, if, you know, I have multiple solutions, or maybe if I just don't want it to look like this, maybe I want it to be a little bit fancier. So, again, this solve stores this as a finite set, so we can do more. All right, we're going to import all the rest of these. Now, here, knowing that it's a finite set, I'm going to store that answer as this variable called solution. And then this particular equation, I know this has one solution, so I'm just going to have it display solution index zero. And that's going to be the first solution, which in this case is going to be the only solution. So when we run it, there we go. And again, this is pretty useful if I want it a little bit nicer output, just like having that nice user interface, you know, having it display zero equals and then waiting for the prompt. So, you know, some other ways we can do this. And, you know, here's saving this. Okay, that's great. Now, what if I have multiple answers? And what if I don't know how many answers I'll have? So I'm going to put this here, so if I enter the solution, now, maybe I'll just put the first one here. We'll get we'll get to this one next soon enough. So I'll just take the same solution that I know has one solution. And just like we were doing before, I'm going to solve it and store that as a solution. Now, notice my loop here and Python has this great method of iterating through everything in that list. So for S in solution, so there we go, every item in that solution set, whether it be one, whether it be however many, it'll iterate through that. So S is that solution. And then it'll go through. It'll be that solution. And each time, I'm just going to print x equals, and then I'm going to print out S. So, you know, we make use of the Python shortcuts. There we go. So 2x minus 4, the solution is 2. And we went through and did this. So what if I have something like something that has multiple solutions? So what if I have something like something that has multiple solutions? And so I'd also supposing I want to prompt for this. All right. So what if I just plug in something like this? Now, this, I know is going to have three solutions, because the three possibilities that would make that zero. So let's see what this does. Again, loops through, and it will output all three solutions very nicely. So we see we're building some of these things behind the scenes that will output one or multiple solutions and output it in a nice way. So we see, you know, if you're going to copy some code that you're going to use, this is the one to do it. Because, you know, you could even like, you know, you take out this, this was my demonstration. But there we go. And you really don't even need these. So this could be your code. And that will work for anything, because it's going to prompt anybody, you or you or anybody else using this to enter the enter the equation. So there we go. You see, we're building some tools here that we can use to solve. All right. What other ways can we do this? Now, some interesting things. We're also this time, we're going to call it VAR for variables, and we're going to use x, y, but we'll come back to the y. And we have this one first. You can, because you can use this for multiple equations, but I just call this one first. So there you go, two x plus 10. All right. Now, we know that this is set equal to zero. That's kind of the the go-to way of doing this. But then this simpy syntax, we're actually going to spell it out and define it. EQ first, comma zero, saying that this is set equal to zero. Because then I can solve for x. That's great. And this solution I just called sol. And since I have this one, I know that the solution is, you know, there's only one. So I just put salt. You know, that's my finite set. And I want the index zero. So this is it. And actually, these are factored results, but this is actually going to give me a nice actual answer because I can get that answer. X is negative five. All right. Now, here's where y comes in. Now, I have to have y there. If I define y as a variable. Now, down here, I can say, supposing this is equal to y. And you see that works. So spelling it out here that it's equal to y. But now I now I'll solve for x. So that's kind of interesting. And then when we do this, you see, Python could actually do some of this factoring for you. You know, rearranging an equation algebraically. So now it's solved. Why over two minus five. Pretty cool. So we can do something like that. We can rearrange things. And then if I have this, you know, I could I could change it around a little bit or whatever. But some different things you can do. The default is make this equal to zero. Make this equal to zero. But this gives you this other flexibility. You can call it equal to y. And then you can do some other things you can solve for it. So pretty cool. As you do this, as you incorporate this into, you know, some of the notebooks that you're going to create, tinker around with this and, you know, try some different things. You know, that's the idea. You go through some different some different formulas or different equations in a textbook and say, hey, can I try this? Like, we could take a look at this and say, all right, let's see, solve for y. Now, what about if I have two x, then, then if I want to solve it for and you can even include y in here. So there we go. And if that's included in y, then I still might then go back down here and say that this is equal to zero, because that's kind of the default way for that to go. And I, I can still go back and solve for x, and it should end up being very similar. Because, you know, if I want to do something very similar, because whether that was, you know, without this minus y saying it, it's equal to y or with this minus y saying it's equal to zero, see algebraically very similar. And, you know, we could even just to show you, we can even say this to x minus y. And we can run this. There we go, x is y over two, all kinds of different things you can do. If you need to rearrange this, you can put that in this setup here. And then, you know, what is, what is this set equal to now? And what am I solving for here? And in this case, it pretty much will be index zero for that solution set each time. So these are some cool things you can get the code to do all the factoring for you. Well, here's some other factoring. Supposing I have something like this, you know, we can divide out common factors. Now, you might see this, two x, two times x, ten times y, plus four. Now, supposing this is another thing in SymPy, I can just factor it. You know, I'm not saying that's equal to zero or anything. I just want to take a look at this. I don't want to factor it. Look at that. And SymPy also does the nice display on the output, too. So you see, there was a common factor of two. And that worked. Now, supposing I had this, and let's say this is three, which then doesn't factor at all. So when I run it, you know, it will just output that because it's not factorable. All right. Now, what's really interesting is if I have something else, like x squared, and let's say x squared minus four. Now, you may or may not be familiar with that factoring, but I can factor something like that, too. I look at that. It'll factor that out. That's the correct factoring of that, x minus two, x plus two. So it will do a lot of really interesting factoring for you. So pretty good. Here's another one that we can, you know, just to show you that we can even take it to the next level. X to the third minus two x squared minus five x plus six. So we have that. And if I factor that, there we go. Look at that. It breaks it down into these factors. So some of these really good things, you know, knowing that you can set your factoring, you know, you know, you can set your factoring, you can make your own factoring calculator here. All right. So let's take a look at some of the functions here. So when we have, you know, we have that, we can factor. And then you've been doing some of this practice with these functions. So I want to show you, you know, you know, looking at these and this different input, how we can, how these functions are working that, you know, remember you were doing the practicing the one step functions, the one step addition, one step multiply. There we go. Now, that first one I want to show you is because you can't do string to a fraction. This print, this works out just fine. But when we take this input, now other inputs, if it's actually a number or a decimal, you can do this and you can cast it as a float. So that's a number that could include a decimal. But if you know that it's going to be a fraction, this float won't work because that slash for the fraction doesn't parse nicely. So then this will give an error. Now, just because it says fraction here, that's just a display. If I just disobeyed that and put in a number, then it wouldn't give me an error. But if I, as soon as they use that divided by, I need that. So that's our first function here is how do I convert the string input, including fractions to a float? So this is the way Python functions work. I'm going to use this DEF to define it. And then once I define that function, I give it the name of the function. I need the open and closed parentheses. And this particular and this particular one will also have input. So I define this variable in the parentheses. That's going to be the input and then colon at the end. So once I define that, then everything under this is indented for spaces. Yep. And I recommend don't use tabs, use indentations. So then I have an if statement and if, and then here's the condition. If this is true, colon, and then that's indented for spaces. Okay. So I take this input string and I'm testing to see if this fraction bar is in there. And notice if this exact character in, in string, cause that's what I called it. That's my input. If it's in there, then we have this split. Each string has this split function. So you can split it and say, all right, at this point, I'm going to split it. And then that creates two different arrays. Now this was all based on string input. So it's going to be two string arrays or two or one array with two elements. And so it's going to be ND. I call that for numerator denominator. So then ND zero is going to be everything before that. And ND one is going to be everything after that. So if this was a fraction, if somebody put a fraction in there, then ND zero, everything before that would be the numerator. So I'll cast it as a float, store it as N for the numerator. And then ND one is everything after that. So I will cast it as a float, store it as D for denominator. And now see, we had to split, we had to detect that split that string. And then each of these two elements individually, cast them as float numbers. And now these are numbers N and D. And now I can actually do that division N divided by D. So you see, because that slash doesn't work for for parsing numbers, I have to like work around it. And now I have ANS as this answer. And then I have the return statement. So this, this function doesn't have a print statement, just returns this. And we'll see where how that comes up. But it just, you know, wherever this function is, it'll out, it'll put that answer. So that's if it has that. And if it doesn't, because I want to be able, I want to use this either way. So anything else, colon, indent, then I won't have a problem. So I'll just take that in string cast as a float. That works. So anything else you put in, we're good. And then again, return ANS. Now, where this comes in, I'll come back to that one, is in the one step multiply. So here's this function, one step more. And I put this common in here, to remind myself or anybody else using this, that it uses this function. So we need to make sure that it's in the same place. All right, so here's, here's the idea to generate, you know, some practice problems for you import random. And then here, I'm going to get random dot Rand int from one to 11. So that's going to be a random integer, and I'll store it as variable A. So that's going to be a random integer, including one, but not including 11. So one could show up, 10 could show up, but 11 won't. So that's, that's the way the random integer works. It includes the first one, but not the last. And then B, I just wanted to make this two to 24. So given these two random integers, notice what we're going to print here. So AX equals B. So we see it's always going to be something times X. And I just want to display this. So I didn't need to worry about the Python syntax with to show the multiplying. All right, so AX equals B. And then you would know, what do you want to do? You want to divide both sides by A. So you know that, and we're going to take your answer, input, you know, X equals, and whatever your input is, we'll store it as ants in. And then the actual answer at this point is going to be, we know divide both sides by A, so the actual answer is going to be B divided by A. So then this was the actual input, notice, still a string. And that's where we're going to use that in our function that we created earlier, string frack. So see, it's going to take that answer, run it through that function, run it through that function, and return right here, that answer. So that way we can easily compare it because this function will return that answer, and then the double equal sign to compare, and we're going to compare it to the actual answer. So there we go. So that's the return statement, wherever I don't have to print or output anything, it just returns that value right here where I have the function. And if it's, if it is good, we're going to print correct. If not, try again, but then print out the answer. So there we go. And now it'll loop through this. Well, this will do it once, and then, you know, we can create a loop to have as many of these as you want, practice one-step equations. So there we go, and then test them each time. And then test them each time. So, you know, we have the simplest one-step addition, is another very similar one. There we go, import random, display the problem, random integers, and yes, you can go through negative numbers if you want. All right. And what are we printing out here? X plus A equals B, because then you know that to solve for X, subtract A. So we'll take your input. What do you think X equals? But also we're going to calculate exactly B minus A. What is it really? And then down here, we don't need to do anything else. We just say, if A and S equals answer. There we go. And here, see, we can cast the float, cast the input as a float right away, because we're not expecting anything fancy. You see the other one, knowing that I'm going to divide, you know, I need to address all the other things that could come up. And there we go. If it's correct, there we go. If not, and then we print out the answer. Cool. So some different things you can do, and you know, one-step addition with negative numbers, just we just did in a slightly different way. So here's a bunch of things that we can do, just practicing your own ability to solve. But we'll also get more into some other functions later, but, you know, good to see these functions. But yeah, yeah, here we go. Just some of the things you can do, factor or solve. So these are the things that you want to be able to do and, you know, set up, you know, start again, start building your own, your own CoLab notebook. So by now, you might have some things that, you know, solve for proportions. You might have some things to, you know, solve for X and, you know, maybe you can even copy one of those, you know, convert fraction input to something, you know, feel free to, you know, copy, copy these, tweak them, make use of them on your own. And, you know, you see you're building your library as well as really understanding the code as you're building this. And, you know, hopefully your understanding of the math, understanding of the code gets deeper and deeper as we, as we go on here. All right, so I think we're ready to go on to the next unit. So let's talk about fractions and decimals and how to convert from one to the other. Well, fractions, when I say out of, like this could be one out of 10. If I say out of, that means divide. So any fraction numerator divided by denominator, you can do that on your calculator and it most likely is going to return at your decimal. There you go. So fractions, decimals, you know, pretty easy. Calculator, do the decimal, you know, pretty easy. Calculator, do the division and then, you know, you have your decimal. But what about doing it in the reverse process? So when we look at this, this, I would read each of these one out of 10, I could call it one tenth or 0.1 is what you would get if you did that division. I would still call that one tenth because that first decimal place is the tenths. So that would be one tenth. Or then if I had one out of a hundred, then there we go, two decimal places. So tenths, the second one, the hundredths. So whether I write it like this or like this, I would still call it one hundredth with the th. Then, you know, I just wrote it one more, you know, third decimal is would be thousandths. So, and it would keep on going. So knowing that we have that, you know, tenths, hundredths, thousandths, then that would be our denominator if we want to convert it back the other way. So if I would, if I had something that I would, you know, 0.234, so something that I wanted to convert, then I would take this as tenths, hundredths, thousandths. That's where it ends. So then I could make that 234 out of a thousand. And I could reduce that, but that still is the fraction that I'm looking for. So 234 out of a thousand. Or if I had something, you know, like 0.4 one place, that's one tenth. So that would be four out of ten. And again, I could reduce it or I could leave it as that, you know, that that's converting my decimal right to a fraction. And when we get into the code, we're going to look at how to see here. I'm just looking at this and remembering these tenths, hundredths, thousandths, et cetera. It could keep going. You could convert any decimal, but I'm looking at these remembering the place values and then saying, oh, that's three. So I'll have ten with one followed by three zeros, you know, one decimal place. So my denominator is one followed by one zero. And we get into the code, we're going to look at how to do that in a different way rather than just, well, there's a few ways you can like take it as a string and count how many places, or we're going to, you know, one of the lessons we're looking at the logarithm way, probably the string and just counting it, that's probably a little more straightforward. We'll do that one. But there we go. Converting these, you know, how do I get this and then, you know, how do I reduce it? Okay. So we think we have it all worked out, but what about if I have a repeating decimal? So supposing I have 0.3333 and it keeps repeating. And mathematically, if I was writing this, you put the line over one of the, the part that repeats. So I really could just keep it as one, but I want to show you three repeats, just put it over the three. So that keeps repeating. Okay. So we were just talking about, you know, how many decimal places and then put it over that. But if it keeps repeating, where do I stop? So let's take a look at a trick how to do this. We want to get to the end of the repeating. So if it only repeats one repeats once, then if I multiply this, let's, let me call this X and actually I'm going to write this down a little bit further. This is, that's going to make sense in a second here. So if I say X is my 0.3333 repeating. All right. So if that's my value, I only need to multiply it by 10 to move the decimal place once. And then that cancel out. So if I have 10 X, then that's 3.3333, et cetera. And these keep repeating. Now, the reason I do that is because of all the repeating decimals, everything that repeats now is going to line up. And so if I subtract these, what can I do on the left? 10 X minus X is nine X equal sign still there. And three point, all this minus zero point, all this that cancels all this, however many decimal places you want to go, it all cancels and my answer's three. And then one step of algebra, solve for X divide both sides by nine. So I get X equals three over nine because nine divided by nine is one. So that's one X, three divided by nine. And I could reduce that as one third if I wanted to. Now keeping it as three over nine, you know, that's nice, like bonus math insight. If I have a single number that repeats, it's that number over nine. That's the fraction. So if I had four over nine, if I had four, if I had, you know, very similar type, type of question, but if I had something like, uh, if I had zero point four repeating, so then 10 times that would be four point or four, et cetera. They both keep repeating. Do the same subtraction. 10 minus one is nine X. And when I subtract these, all the repeating decimals cancel. So four point this minus point four is exactly four. And when I divide both sides by nine, X equals four over nine. So there we go. And, uh, so one more bonus here. If I had nine repeating, we could do the same thing. And you would think 0.999. That's not exactly one. And well later on in calculus, we can look at limits and how 0.9 repeating. If it keeps on going for all practical purposes, that is one. But if we did this, it would be nine's repeating and we divide by nine and you get X equals one. So it kind of works out nicely, but this is, this is how we can do this. You know, notice we're not looking at code here. Now we're just taking this. And, um, if we have something that repeats, then that's what we need to do. We need to find out where it repeats. If I had something that repeated, um, you know, three, two, two places over and over again, uh, let's do that one. And just to give you an idea of a different way, if I have something that repeats, then if I have, uh, so X equals, uh, 0.090909, something like that, and it's the zero nine that it's the zero nine that repeats. So I need to multiply it by a hundred to line it up. So 100 X because that would move the decimal place twice and that makes it 9.090909, et cetera. So when I do that now, same method, if I subtract these, that's 99 X equals nine because then that cancels. So then X equals 99, uh, nine over 99 and fine, perfectly acceptable answer, but we can reduce this divided by nine. So that's one out of 11. We'll get into reducing fractions and also the code for that too, but you see, this is, this is one way. If you have something that repeats and maybe you're right the way you write the code, it might seem to break it. If, if you don't, uh, if you don't find some way around it, this is the way around it. So we can convert any repeating decimal, but now we're going to, what we're going to do is we're going to get into the code and how to take any decimal. Just here's the decimal input. How can I find a way to count how many spaces that is and reframe that as a fraction so that given the decimal and then turn it into a fraction related to that is percents because remember the first is 10th hundredth. So the first two digits are the hundredths and that's really what percent means out of a hundred. So percent is all the same thing. And then just, I'm always looking at the first two decimal places. That's my percent. So, you know, very similar, but just the first two decimal places. So let's take a look at the code and we'll see how to convert any decimal to a fraction. All right. So let's talk about how to convert decimals to fractions with code. And first we'll get some background here because this is going to be useful. So if I have 10 two different exponents, let's take a look at the positive exponents. So 10 to the first power, we see this first one, 10 to the first power, 10 to the second, 10 to the third. We'll see these come up. What happens when we take 10 to a positive exponent, 10 or anything else to the zero exponent, and then we'll take a look at 10 to the negative one or negative two or negative three. So this will just print these out, but let's take a look at what this does. So we see 10 to the first, second, or third becomes 10, 100, 1,000, 10 or anything to the zero is 1. And then the negative exponents are how many decimal places? 0.1, 0.01, 0.001. So these are the things we're looking for and we're going to make use of this as we convert our our decimals to fractions. So the next thing, we'll take a look at how to get user input. And we have this formula here, user input, open parentheses, and in quotes here, this is what it will display. And then you'll see then a box, you know, then asking for input. And then here we're going to store that as text as that's the variable. For our purposes here, we're just going to show you that you can enter a number and we're going to print it out. I call the variable text just to remind you it comes in as a string. We can't do any math with it yet. But one of the things I can do, any string, I can figure out the length of that string. So we're just going to print that out. And I just have, again, this comment here, if I tried to do math with it, then there would be an error. So let's take a look. So you see, enter a number. And then if I had a number with a decimal, like 0.123, I hit enter. You see 0.123, the length of it is four, because as a string, these are four characters, the decimal point counts as one character. So different things I can do with this. So I, you know, if I wanted to enter a number, now, if I have, if I cast it as a float, now I can do math to it. And I can cast it as a float or an int for integer. So just keeping in mind, you know, things I might want to do with this, a float can have decimal places. So that's usually my default cast. But, you know, if you definitely know that you want it to be an integer, we would use that. But we're going to enter a number, cast it as a float and store it as the variable number num. Now I can do math to it. I'm going to print out num plus four. So we'll see. There we go. If I enter a number, there we go. And if I have 0.123, then hit enter. You see now I can, now I can add. All right, or whatever other math operation you want. Once you cast as a float or an int, then you can do math to it. And the float, because it can handle decimal, any math operation that there might be a chance of a decimal use float. Okay, so we're going to put all this together. So converting this input, which will come in as a decimal. So I'm going to take this input and here's what I'm going to print out. Enter a decimal number to convert. There we go. So we know that that's input and that's going to be stored as digits. And we know that that's a decimal. And we know that that's going to be a string. So to get the number of decimal places, the next thing. So I'm going to use this, the length of that input digits, and I'm going to cast it as an integer first. So notice that happens first. Then I'm going to subtract one, because remember as a string, that decimal point is going to count when I do the length of that string. So I want to subtract one because I don't want that decimal. So now whatever decimal enter minus the decimal point itself, that's going to be an integer that's going to be the exponent. And now here I go back to digits that is still a string. Now I'm going to cast that exactly as a float number. I'll store that as n. So now I know how many decimal places it took to make that and the number itself is a float. So let's talk about our fraction. My numerator is going to be n times 10 to a certain exponent, 10 to that exponent. So in my previous example, point one, two, three, then it's going to be, you know, that was four, the length of that was four, so minus one, so the one, two, three becomes my exponent. And then when I multiply it by that exponent, it makes it a whole number. And since I know it's going to be a whole number, I will cast it as an integer. So that's going to be my numerator. And then the denominator is going to be 10 times that exponent. So you see that that is what we were doing before we were doing the code. You know, how many digits, how many decimal places, and then, you know, my numerator is that times 10 to that many des- 10 to that exponent, and the denominator is just 10 to that exponent. So three decimal places would be that times 10 to the third, and then the numerator denominator would be 10 to the third, and it gets you that decimal place. Now, that's numerator and denominator for any fraction. Percent is just the first two decimal places. So whatever n is, I'm going to multiply it by 100, because then that just gets the percent. That decimal, move it over tw- move decimal place twice, which is multiplying by 100. So now we'll see the output, the decimal. There we go. We just repeat the decimal again. The fraction, numerator, and I'm just going to print this out to show you it's numerator over denominator, and then the percent, and then I'll print out the percent symbol. There we go. This, remember, in math means something else, but here I'm putting it in quotes. It'll just be the percent symbol. So we're going to enter a decimal number to convert, and there we go. Point, uh, one, two, five, enter. There we go. The decimal, point, one, two, five, and then the fraction is 125 out of a thousand. That's correct, and the percent's 12.5. And we can run this again and do this for however many decimals we want. Um, you know, point two, enter. So it's point two, two out of 10, or 20 percent. And there we go. The same things we were doing, and this is what we want to get, look at throughout this course. You know, the steps that we're doing in math, we can break this down, and we're pretty much doing the same steps, but then now once we have this written in code, then, you know, you have a formula that you can reuse. Okay, I'll bring up this, bring up the script here, and I'll be able to convert any decimal to a fraction. There we go. Now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit, let's look through some extra problems, and I'm going to work through extra problems using the Colab notebook, so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building, and use these to solve some of the problems that we have, problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life. So we're going to go through some more extra problems here. So now I want to show you how to put together your own calculator. You know, this is what we're talking about here. You're making resources for yourself. So in all the things that I'm showing you, and you'll have access to all these different, uh, resources here, but you're going to put together yours. So you're going to click on new, and you would have already the Google Colab, so go over to Google Colaboratory, click on it, and now this is going to be yours, so actually I will call it that. I'm going to put the underscore, it accepts spaces though, your calculator, and you just hit enter or click somewhere else, and there we go. So this is what you can do to put together your calculator based on things that we've been doing so far, and then things that we do further on in the class, then you can add to it. So you can go through and go to, let's say, the week one notebook where you solve for proportions, and here's some things you can do. So if you click on this text here to set up the proportion, let's copy that first. So you click on that text and go all the way over the three dots. This looks like copy, but it actually doesn't do what you're expecting it to do. Click on the three dots, copy that cell, and when you go back to your calculator, I'm just going to click in the open space here and paste it, Ctrl V or Command V. Actually, it's kind of cool. So, you know, Ctrl V for the Windows, Command V for Mac, and CoLab accepts either one, and then we can go back. That's your proportion set up there, and let's copy this again over all the way over the three dots, copy cell, and your calculator, and we're going to paste it. So you can have this, you know, we don't need this. If you have an extra one, that one, the trash can over there. So there we go. Now you have your text set up proportion, and then it really is then self-explanatory. You know, you see the setup and put in N1, D1, N2, D2, and even the comment there, put the zero in for the unknown value. So you can go through each of these. Then if we look at week two, now we were doing a lot of things for solving for X, and maybe you don't need to do the simplest one. Maybe you like the prompting. You can include that. Doing more with the solution, how we split it up. Now, I personally, I like this one, so that might be the one that I copy as one of them. And what you can do is, you know, click on here, because notice this one, I personally like this one. It prompts for the input, already showing that it's something equal to zero. You know, there we go. We already have X as the symbol, and then this also prints out multiple solutions if you have them. So this is nice. We can copy this. And when you go back into yours, now if I just paste this, that's great. I actually don't need that. And notice it didn't paste where I wanted it to be. So watch what we can do here. I'm going to click in here and use these arrows. I'm going to move it down, and actually down one is just fine. Now, we wanted some text in there. So right above it, you hover there, add text, and solve for X. Maybe I'll just add that text there. So there's more from that week. So we have that. That's nice. Now, this solve in other ways, that was pretty good. And then notice there's also factoring. So you could include something like this, solve in other ways, or factor, you know, simpy.factor. Now, I might include this because you'll see we'll come back to the one of the other ones. So if we copy this, and this is just factoring, we can actually do this. And this is just factor when there's, you know, nothing else to solve. You see, so maybe we'll copy this cell, and paste this down here. Now, maybe I'm going to add text and just put factor. And down here, then I will paste it. Didn't show up where I wanted to. I can use the arrow, move it down. So, you know, there we go. We have set equation equal to zero ready to solve. But we can even make this, you know, equation to factor. And see, you can put this however you want. There we go. And then, you know, you can factor things. So we have these. We can go into the next week. Now, notice to put it all together, because when we went through and looked at some of these leading up to converting a decimal to a fraction. So this was putting it all together. You're prompting the person to enter in this, and then we're going to convert that output, the decimal, the fraction, the percent. So that's nice. Maybe we copy this. And the factoring we'll get back to. So then we go down to here. Maybe I'll paste that here. And that's good. So we just want some text ahead of it. Decimal to fraction. So you see now you're putting together your resources here. And we don't need that output right now. Now, we have one more here. Factoring and solving for a variable. And notice it's when I paste this, I might put it with the other one. But we see, remember we did this, then you have the left side, which could be equal to zero, and the right side of the equation, which could be anything. You know, this would be about the only thing that you would need to change here. Change the variable you want to solve for. And I put all these as your basic common variables that you would use, but you know, you could always change that too if you want, but you might not need to change that line. And then this one will solve it, even if it is something that you can just, you know, solve for a variable. It doesn't come down to an exact number here. So that might be a nice one. And then we keep this example in here. You know, copy this. Now, we might put this in here with factor solve for x, factor solve for x, and factor solve for a variable. Maybe we put it in here somewhere. And notice you can just click and add code. I'll click right in here and paste it. And this will be pretty much right where I want it to be. Then I might delete this, add some text, solve for a variable. Now, these are just some examples here of how you could put this together. So that then you have your resource here, proportion. There we go. Solve for x, factor, solve for a variable, convert decimal to fraction to percent. And then things that we do later on, you could add more into this here. Now, supposing you want you you want it to put a lot here and then you add all this, that's this is a lot of scrolling. So one of the things you can do is, is now I'm going to start with proportion. I like so right around here, you could there's there's multiple ways to do this. You could insert, you go up top, insert a section header cell. So I'll do it one way this way. I'll do insert section header cell. And actually, I want that above. So I noticed this, when you double click on this, you see some of this. These text boxes accept HTML, look at that the br to split the split the line, and they accept latex, which is how to format various things fractions, formulas, all kinds of things. So in this new section, and you see, because it's in this text part, that's not a comment in Python, it's the new section. And I might just make this proportions. Okay, so now, you see, it takes that and all these cells become a part of that section. I don't want that. But what I want to do is, if this next one, I want to make this this section, and I don't need another one, I think that'll be the section header. There we go. So I'm just going to put this here. Now that's a new section. So we see proportions now just has the two cells, the text about setting it up, and then the code. And solve for x has just one cell because that section said it all. And then we have the code. There we go factor. And maybe you want to say something more than just factor, but you can make this a section heading. Solve for a variable. There we go. And in seeing all this this together. So you see solve for a variable. Convert decimal to fraction. You know, that probably I didn't need anything else here, solve for a variable. All the rest was explained in the comments. And convert decimal to fraction. So now this just has the one cell. And the advantage of doing this is, over here, you see these lines. Now we have the table of contents here. There we go. And I could change, you know, that's long enough. I don't like it when it goes on to two lines, but that fits so that it's a longer title, but that's okay. And you can have your table of contents that you can actually go through. And you see jump to proportions. Jump to solve for x. You know, different things. And in the view, you could change the view to collapse sections. You don't have to, but you could. And then you see you have all these. So these are some things you can do in putting together your Google code like this. Putting together your Google CoLab notebook. You know, I want this to be your calculator that you're building. So then you're learning how to do all this, but then you also are building your resources here that you can then refer to. Oh, what do I need to do? Click on it. Enter what I need to enter and solve it. You know, you're essentially making your menu here. So that's what I want you to do for this unit, is take a look at what we've been doing so far and put it together in your own notebook. Some of the things we'll do later will even get fancier and we'll, you know, make some of these into functions that you can use in different places. But this would be a good place. Put together your notebook of resources. Here's one way to do it, but you know, you can tweak it to the way you like it. All right. And now we're ready to learn the next thing. So what does it mean to be a function? A function means it in math and in code that you're taking some input and then doing something to it. And actually there are some functions in code you don't have to take input, but in math we will. So like we were talking about our unknown number being X, the output will be Y. So each function we want to take X as the input and then we're going to say that the output is Y. And here we're dealing with all numbers. What am I doing to X and then outputting Y. So you see we have like solving for X we were doing before, but now we have a second variable and we still want the idea that just like in the alphabet X comes before Y in science and in research, we can call X the independent variable because that's what changes first. And then Y is the dependent variable because it depends on what X does. So if I want to solve this or do anything to it, then I'm going to plug in a value for X and I can pick any value. I might start with zero. So I'm going to define it over here. My input X is zero. And then what happens when I plug that in? So that'd be Y equals two times zero plus three. And you see I'll just put in zero in parentheses where I plug in this number because it highlights that that's what I just plugged in. And also the fact that they're next to each other I'm still multiplying. So when we do this two times zero zero plus three, then that would be Y equals three and my output is Y. And if you remember then that's an XY coordinate on the graph. X is zero, Y is three and I'd be able to plot that point and I can keep going. What other points can I, what other numbers can I plug in? I'm even just going to keep this. So supposing I have X equals X equals one. Plug in one. Two times one is two plus three is five. Y equals five. And then we'll plug that in and I can plug in as many or as few. I don't have to have integers. I tend to do that so you can see the numbers a little bit clearer. But you know you don't have to worry about doing any other calculations in your head. But if I have this I can put in whatever numbers I want as many or as few. I can put decimal numbers in there and we can plot these on the graph which we'll talk about a little bit later. But this is the essence of a function that X comes before Y. I plug in an X value and then output the Y value. So another function notation that a lot of people like is instead of using another variable Y and this connects a lot with the way the code's going to look. We call it F of X and F for function. So two X plus three. So if you see these, these are the same thing. Y equals two X plus three or F of X equals two X plus three. This notation F of X and that's what we read F of X, F for function. We solve it the same and this connects a lot more with your computer science. So if I have the output called F of X, one of the advantages when we get into writing the code is that in algebra we tend to just say F for function. But in writing Python or other code you can actually give your function a name and it doesn't have to just be F for function. It can be add, divide, calculate the area, something really even a long phrase like that as long as there's no spaces. So if we have this and then sometimes then let's say if I wanted to plug into two I could write in F of two. And so again the usefulness of this notation is because I see what what am I already defining as my input and then I know what am I doing next. I'm going to do two times two plus three. Two times two is four plus three is seven. So F of two is seven. So now I know that answer and when I see that X is two, Y is seven. And we'll see how this you know really relates to the code and how we can write even a little bit more elaborate functions with code and how we can define the input there. Then we'll look at graphing it. All right so let's take a look at the code. So with the code and functions we can do very similar to what we would be doing by hand writing out the math. Here I'm just going to define one X value as an example and here is the function that Y value. Y equals four times X plus three. And you see Python syntax have to make sure we put the times. So I'm just going to plug in that Y X value become you know substitutes in for this X value. So it's four times five plus three and then I'm just going to print out my solution X comma Y. So we see that and before I print that out. So that's one thing one X value but I can loop this. So I'm going to print out this line here which is X and then I'm going to put a tab Y. So that's defining my columns here X and Y. And then what I'm going to do is loop through all those values. So for X in range 11 so X is going to go 0 through 10. And then I'm going to take that same function and each time then I'm going to plug in that X value solve for Y and I'm going to print out the X Y values. And in this case again I'm going to put the tab in between. So this is the essence of what we're doing with a function. Each time I get an X value plug it in solve for Y and then I have an X Y value and this is going to print this out as a table. So when I run this we'll see it'll come out first of all we'll have that that one solution you see five twenty three five comma twenty three that first solution and then we have our table X Y and all of our X Y values if X is zero Y is three if X is one Y is seven etc. And we also have five twenty three that shows up on the list too. So that's defining a function. Now Python has a lot of other functions beyond math you can do things with and we can still use that same type of Python function definition for our math. Here we can on this line define the function. So D E F space and Python I can name my function anything but I'm going to use the classic math notation F of X and then here I have a colon. So this is going to define the function everything underneath is indented four spaces and I have Y equals my four times X plus three. That's the function and what am I going to do then I'll return the Y value. So whenever I run this that'll return the Y value. So you see this in use if I print here if I print five so I already know I want that to be my X value comma and then I'm going to call this function right here F of five and it's going to take that and run it through there we go. Same type of thing same type of thing then we'll define this and when we run this it's just going to print that 523 and next we could put this in a loop I could just take the same loop here and I'm going to copy this and I can just take that same loop if I wanted to and in this case I'm going to print because I already have that function defined I don't need this and I could really just put put that here F of X you see so I could I could just have right here since I defined that function X F of X and I don't have my headings and I don't have my headings here but I think we can use our imaginations there we go so printed that one value but then in the loop just went through and looped so these are the ways that we can illustrate a function in code and you know what we can do with these functions you know is almost limitless you know you can have a function do anything and you can name it anything more more complex than this you know give it a word but I wanted to show you the connection with the classic math notation and functions in Python whether I actually just call it y equals that that still works as a function or whether I define it and next we're going to look at graphing functions so now when we talk about graphing functions we'll use this equation y equals two x plus three and I'll use the x and y notation so we have our input and output you know all the different x values and what y values match up so if you ever come across something like something like this you can see that if I plug in both of these x and y that should make the statement true and so we have a few of our points here and then now we're going to see how that matches up with the Cartesian plane our x y coordinate plane it's Cartesian because Rene Descartes invented this so we have zero zero at the center and how much I count for x positive to the right negative to the left and it comes first like x comes first in the alphabet then my y value positive up negative down and and my coordinate pair would be my x y so this zero three would be zero so I'm not going left or right at all up to three plot the point now I don't also need to write this but I'll show you so then that would be the point zero three so x y and then one five so I would go over one up five plot the point and then that's one five two seven plot the point now I just plotted three points but I'll tell you if you really wanted to try many in between points decimals or other numbers that are in between you could bet that each of these whatever you know one point something two point something they would all end up being on this line it's continuous there's no x value that can't go into this well whatever weird fraction or decimal you know mixed number anything so all the numbers would be on this line so with this type of function we're going to call it linear and we'll get into other types of functions but that's where we plot a few points and then we want to look at these patterns what type of graph does this end up looking like so what we're going to do now is look at in the python code how to create a graph and plot points to make a basic blank graph we're going to import this library matplotlib.pyplot and that's a lot so we're going to we can import this as plt so I can reference this whole library as plt from here on out and here's what we're going to do the first line is these are standard variables that we use fig for the figure axe for the axis so these two variables and that equals plt.subplots and then that sets this up and we'll do plt.show the base there you go import set this up and then show and then that gives a basic graph these are all the defaults nothing else going on there and you know we have this set up so we're going to build upon that now let's define the dimensions here notice that was all just the first quadrant everything's positive and even only one goes in positive and even only one goes up to one so again import matplot library plot we set that same two first lines but now let's take a look at these dimensions now I have that plt so it's plt.axis and I'm going to set this axis all right and it gives you the range of x values and y values I'm going to show a better way in a second but you can do this on one line here's the dimensions and now when we show it I want it to go from negative 10 we see across the bottom the x-axis negative 10 up to 10 zero in the middle and on the y-axis negative 10 up to 10 zero in the middle that's great but I have no lines I have no axis and you know not the clearest so here's first of all here's a better way to set the dimensions is I'll define them right at the beginning as variables x min x max y min y max and that way all right I want it 10 in every direction and I can set them here easy to see it and change it if I want to and now when I do all this this is really what I'm doing when I set the axis size x min x max y min y max that's really the arguments that it's taking and it becomes a lot clearer when we set it up like this so then I have this and I can set this and then if I wanted to I say oh for this one this y value goes really a lot higher so maybe I want that y maximum to be 20 instead of 10 and then when I run it now notice the the size of this still looks the same but it adjusted accordingly and on my y-axis it goes up to 20 and on my x-axis negative 10 to 10 and so let's display axis lines here if I have my dimensions defined and now when I plot the axis well that's the one we already did here the window size but I'm going to just plot them as lines so this line here I have x min x max as my array of x values see notice it's plt.plot and I have my array of x values and then my array of y values and the default is to make this a line so it won't just plot two x values and two y values it'll draw the line from x min 0 to x max 0 and this b in quotes makes it blue so we're going to do the same thing with the y plt.plot and my x values are going to be 0 at 0 y min 0 y max and then it'll get make that a blue y-axis just because I like blue and there we go so now we have this that will give us our x y-axis so from everything we do now we have an axis we have a point of reference so everything that we plot is going to you know start with this now define the dimensions set all this up we might not even need to change any of this and that's going to give us our graph with an x y-axis all right so how do we plot one point so we see the axis the default is a line and I made it blue b in quotes so how do I plot a point well I make this line here I have an array of one value which is five for the x value one value which is four for the y value and then the r makes it red and the zero makes it a circle actually that's oh so there's some other options you can do you can do a dash you can do different symbols but for right now I'm going to make this a red circle and that's how we make make that circle and that's how we make that here if I have these two and so when I run this it'll still plot those as an axis and then we'll do five four and then that's going to be a red dot all right so if I wanted to plot multiple now connecting with what we were doing with the functions here I'm going to set up my graph and here in rain in my range I'm going to have the range from 10 so I'm going to go from this from this value my y value y equals 0.5 x plus one and in this case instead of making it a table I'm going to do plot plt dot plot and I'm going to plot that x y value as a dot so this range and I'm going to plot these x y values and again that's the essence of graphing a function I have all these different values and when I plot all these points I'm going to see this nice pattern emerge that this all lines up and I'll tell you if I plotted points that were in between whatever x values there would be they would also line up that's why it's a linear function the graph of it's going to be a straight line and then every point on this line every x y value if I plug in this function it's going to work so my loop to graph a function and here then we'll create a loop to do the function and the table so like we were doing before I'm going to build upon this basic graph that I have I'm going to print the x tab y for the heading of the table and then in my loop I'll use the same function here I'm going to plot the point and I'm going to add it to the table and all these it it actually won't plot all the it'll kind of save these points and it won't plot them all it's really just going to add them all to the table and display the table because it really doesn't show the graph until the last thing outside the loop here is going to be plt.show when you have graphs I think Python just likes to have that plt.show last so do your other stuff first and then show the graph so then we have this and we have our table of y values notice if I just put one number in the range it'll do zero to that number but I can have negative five comma ten or I could even just go back to those original values that I defined up here and make this x min x max you see and then but as you know you can put any two numbers in here and it'll do the range between there and you see it just abruptly starts here and abruptly ends here but I could change that to make this x min and I can make this x max but remember I want to graph that last point so I'll do x max plus one and I can have that range and now it'll give the full table of values and it'll graph the full dimensions so there we go we see what we can do with the function I have whatever math function I have plug in different values and see the results see the numerical output see the graphing output and now we see the connection of graph the table and the functions now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and I'm going to work through extra problems using the codelab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so let's talk about more ways to graph and more things we can do with the graph because we want to be able to display our data our functions so we did look already at how we can loop through inputs you know I can define my graph and we already did this the x min and max y min and max and we talked about how we can loop through I get x in a range and then each time I'm going to plug this in and plot that value and that's the idea of the function that each time I get an x value in this range plug it in for y plug it in here get y and I plot that x y point in this case as a red dot after doing all that then we show the graph but what if we didn't have to do a loop for our input what if we could use an array and we'll revisit this again in other units but we have this numpy array and it's not that long of a word but it just seems to be the convention that we import it as np and so you'll see a lot of examples throughout the internet that np dot this or that so that's what we're going to do and again defining x min x max so given this numpy array here's what we're going to do then given these values I'm going to define how many points I want in my array and in this case it's going to be two times x max minus x min I feel like that's probably enough for our purposes but that number two you can up that to 10 or whatever you want and then we see so then we want to make as many things dependent on these values as we can that way if that changes if I change my window everything else will change accordingly and I don't have to go through and find all these variables so yeah I get the full range times two so that's two points through that you'll see that that's actually going to work out just fine but you can always increase that so now they have any points this is how I define my array of x values and since I really am only using this once I'm going to just call it x because that is my array of x values and so numpy we have np dot linspace so we have this function here which is going to set up our array you know space for linear graphing so it takes the argument where do I start where do I end and how many points do I have so we see we just make all this dependent and then I get my x value so this saves us the time of having to do a loop python will do this for us here's all the graphs and we're going to talk about how to change some of this stuff too in a minute so now I'll just I like to define my x value up there right where I have number of points in the range so I have my y value and for our purposes here we'll just call it you know call it y equals but you can graph multiple things on the same axis and you know you can have y1 y2 whatever you'd like so I just define this relatively simple linear function here so then when I plot I'll plot x and y and if you remember before we were plotting x and y each as an array in this case with only one element but here you see I define my x value as an array of x values and therefore y becomes an array of y values so I can just reference these variables x y because they each do represent an array in this case then I decided to make the line red so I put it r in quotes so there we go and when we graph this then we can see I have my graph and yeah that looks about like that would be 2x plus 1 with the red line all right so let's talk about some other things we can customize here now yes r g b work well you know I just had to put b for the blue line r g for green and if I want it to be a black line then I will put k so you see r g b c m y k those all work as you know simplified ways to define the color of the line if you don't put anything python will actually assign a color to each line and it'll cycle through so that if you plot a few lines they each get a different color but if you really say you know okay I want it specifically to be this line for this color you can define this and then other than those major colors you can actually just write in colors then you know there's no one letter abbreviation for pink but if I want my line to be pink I can write in the word and I can't say like every color that will be acceptable here but it's going to be a bunch you know if you want a line of a particular color type it in try it and there we go so we have all these different ways to define the color of line because remember this plot when this plot graphs the default is that it's a line so if I want it to be a point then I would have to define these definitely not as an array but as each an array of one value and then the the letter but then something like oh for a circle or the carrot for a triangle or something like that so or a dash so you know we could define if we just wanted to be a point we'll see that in a second here so there we go so we have our axis and our line but we're you know we're not done customizing it first of all let's take a look at a look at these tick marks you know zero and then every 2.5 maybe I don't want it exactly like that we'll change some of these things and maybe you know this seems kind of blank maybe I want to see the grid lines so here's some other things we can do all right I'm still going to import certainly matplotlibrary but I'm also doing numpy because we use that for some of the things for graphing and same thing I'll define you know the window up here and the x values based on that window so for now I'll keep this you know the same axis I just like blue so we'll keep that now notice when we do up here figure and axis so the labels would be in the axe variable so axe dot set x label axe dot set y label axe dot set title there we go x values y values and some graph and I didn't mean that some graph like whatever I meant more like you know like from charlotte's web or some graph so anyway so we have these and I commented these out we'll get to these later and I have a few other things here so I still have one y value and then I'm going to plot that now notice this I'm going to define this as a label you know it can have a label rather than a color rather than a color but notice no color I can also do a color but since I don't have one we'll see what color python assigns to us and then I decided to plot a point and in this case it's red and see zero red or that's actually oh the lower case o so it's going to be a circular point and then this one's going to have a label too and I'm going to plot something else here's same x values and then notice I can define the y value up here and then say y right there or I could put the y value in here directly either way whichever you feel like doing I don't want to show you the different options here and again we have this label also so let's just take a look at the x label the y late set x label y label and the title and then we'll see these different these different lines so there we go and you know we get nice orange a different shade of blue and I define that as a red dot so there we go but what if all right so let's see what if I want the axis to show the grid it looks kind of plain what if I want to see the grid so when I comment that out and this one notice true is a capital T it will actually show the grid lines and you see it does line up to the tick marks that are already there every 2.5 but there we go so if we want to see the grid lines and we have this I can and we have this and now we have our x you know our labels x values y values some graph you could actually put the graph and in one of the later units we'll look at some details about how to even automatically if I wanted to graph one line and have the title of the graph be that line but you know you could always just type that in you know instead of some graph you could actually just type that in as a string you know the equation of the line okay so let's take a look at numpy again and in this case let's say the 2.5 in each direction is not really what I want so again we have x dot and we're going to set x ticks and set y ticks so setting these tick marks on each axis so it's a different sort of array I'm going to do num mp dot arrange and what do I want to arrange very similar to the way we did x values I get my minimum my maximum and then this is how often do I want to tick mark every two numbers so that's what we're going to do from y min to y max and you see again basing it off of those original variables if the window changes then all this will update automatically so there we go so let's just take a look at that supposing I change the tick marks and we see then now every two and maybe that's a little bit better instead of 2.5 and we see these now if I wanted it every one then I'm going to change that just to one and notice this is just for the tick marks along the side but up here when we do x dot grid true that's going to just follow whatever tick marks we've assigned so now we just change this every one and now we get this sort of graph where I definitely can count the boxes and see you know let's take a look at the slope of each line let's see these and python still does it around the edge so that way it doesn't get in the way of anything that's in the middle of the graph all right there we go so we can keep this that's that's pretty nice okay so what's one of the things we have all these labels but we didn't see them anywhere so if you have all these labels then we add this other plt dot legend here we go and we can see these labels so I wanted to show you that each of these labels we can have you know this line we labeled with the equation the point I just wrote the word point but you could put anything and the other one labeled with just some more steeper line so we could always do this and in the same way you know even if python assigns it you'll see the matching you know which line are we referencing which point are we referencing so some good things that we can do with these we can have the tick marks or not we can change how often they come up we can have the grid or not we can change these labels all right and I encourage you just to get in and you know tinker with this you know take a look at all some of the different ways you can you know match up different graphs you can you know set different things and we will get into even more graphing but that's going to be when we get to systems of equations and some other more complex graphs so then we'll revisit this and then we'll you know go a little bit deeper try a few more things with the graph but I think I think this will get you to be able to display any function you have and you know hopefully display it in a way that you say yeah this is exactly how I wanted it to look there we go customizing your graph all right so yeah get in there and tinker with this and see see different ways that you can change the graph so let's talk about slope how can I describe this line that's on an angle using you know describing how it goes up and over so that's what slope is picturing these lines that have a slope to them that they go on some sort of angle but we're going to describe them going up and over like steps how much am I going up and how much am I going over up and over up and over like steps so if I have two points and if I have the graph that I'm looking at that's great I can just count it down that's great I can just count you know looking at two nice points that work out as integers that makes it easier to count so I can say from this point to this point I'm going up three one two three and then over one so up three over one well then my slope is three and I can do the same thing you know from that to the next point I can go up three over one plot a point up three over one plot a point etc and it would be the same slope anywhere on the line because it's a linear equation it's a perfectly straight line so that's great I can count if I don't have the boxes or you know just have things like this but if I have the points that counting that how much am I going up that's the change in y because y tells me if I'm going up or down so if I look at this I'm going up I just counted three but I could also subtract taking a look at the y values four minus one or then how much am I going over and it's always over to the right so I could look at the x values so from one then to two two minus one how much am I going over so it's always over to the right in this case it's positive because left to right it's going up if it was left to right going down then my second y value would be less and when I subtract then it'd be a negative number so it's always going to the right but y would be positive if it's going up or negative if it's going down and so if I had these and I can count but looking at this I know I can subtract so what's that formula look like well I can write out the formula here slope m equals and that's right m for slope because it's how much we move on the graph so somebody started using m and it caught on caught on so we're gonna use m for slope how much we move on the graph and remember I said it's how much am I going up so that's the change in y and I can subtract that y2 minus y1 and so I would use a little subscripts you know y2 y1 and that indicates my second y value minus the first one then the change in x would be very similar x2 minus x1 and again the subscript for the second x value minus the first one okay so now that I have this formula let's plug in these numbers and see so we'd have four minus one or minus one I'm subtracting my y values and then two minus one two minus one subtracting the x values and what do I get four minus one is three two minus one is one and three over one any whole number over one that you know divided by one it's a whole number I don't have to write over one so I can just write three so that's where anytime we see anytime you see a slope that just is a whole number it's that number over one and there we go so we have counting if I have the graph subtracting if I just have these two points and you know I'm using that formula so this is great it's the same formula you know anytime we have slope for a linear equation so let's take a look at how we can turn this into code because I want you to get into the mindset that anytime we have a formula you can write write a program for this and you know there we go input the numbers and output in this case the slope so let's take a look at the code and we'll see how we can do this now this part is going to be brief because I just want to show you that you can connect any formula if you know here we we're going to define our x1 y1 x2 y2 and put that into the slope formula slope equals y2 minus y1 divided by x2 minus x1 and really then this is a useful formula and others you can just define your variables and run it through the formula here we're just going to output the slope there we go all you need is the two points next we're going to work on developing the full equation but then let's take a look at how that comes together on the graph first all right so we've already figured out that the slope is three in our two points but let's say we have this two points and we want to figure out the equation of this line we know that this is linear and I have these two points that we figured out that the slope m because moving from one point to the next we went up three and over one or I just subtract four minus one over two minus one and then four minus one is three two minus one is one so three over one we figured out that the slope is three and we want the full equation of of this line now knowing that it's linear we can imagine here that it would cross the y-axis somewhere and that's what the y-intercept is the intercept is where does it cross so we have a nice formula slope intercept form and that slope intercept form is y equals mx plus b now we call the slope m because that's how much we move from one point to the next and we'll call the other one b because that's where we begin on the y-axis so many things happen in this first quadrant where everything's positive so we picture that we begin on the y-axis and then move in that direction of course you know we can go in different directions but so I have this y equals mx plus b now what we have is our slope is m the x y comes from any of these x y points so I'll pick one of these points and then b would be the y-intercept it works out that way so if we take a look at this I'm going to take one of the x y points how about I take this this first one here because it's one one that that would be nice and easy to calculate it works for either one so when I plug in this the y value is one and then the slope which we just figured out was three and then the x value is also one I'll just put that in parentheses so notice mx you know in my math notation I don't have to write that I'm multiplying just because they're next to each other so I'll do the same thing when I plug in you know m and then plug in for x and now b I don't know so that's where I have I plug in slope that I know one point so that's four things that I know one point one point one point one point two things I know three of them I can figure out the fourth one and we'll do this multiplying one equals three plus b and remember our one step equation subtract three from both sides so I get negative two equals b so now that I have this I figured out that the slope is three I figured out that b is negative two then I put it together leaving x y open because any x y point on this line will work in this equation and my final equation is y equals three x minus two so there we go we've figured out this slope intercept and so now I know that minus two it crosses down here so that coordinate point would be zero negative two and we can see we can see why this is what it shows up like this because when x is zero whatever I plug in as an x value it's good it's going to zero out so three x three times zero it zeroes out and then when x is zero that drops out and then I have minus two so we see that that works out so this is our slope intercept equation and we can when we see this now if we know the slope we can generate the equate slope in the intercept if I had this line I could generate that equation we're going to pretend that that's a straight line but if I had this but if I had this line I could generate that equation oh where does it begin at negative two oh I know that that's b and then I can count for the slope up three over one so then I know that the slope is three and I can go the other way if I had this equation but didn't have the graph I could say oh I'm going to begin at negative two zero negative two plot that point and then the slope is three I would go up three over one plot a point up three over one plot a point and if I was doing this by hand you know paper and pencil I'd probably plot like three points and get out the roar and connect the dots but what we're going to then do here what we're going to do here is take a look at how we can write the code to develop the equation so all I would need is two points and I'm going to do more than calculate the slope I'm going to figure out the full equation so we're going to look at how to take two points and develop a slope intercept equation so now we're going to put it all together and develop the equations so like before we're going to define our x1 y1 x2 y2 from two different points and we're going to calculate the slope which now we're going to call m that's been the go-to variable for slope m for how much the line moves so same formula but now it's going to be m equals y2 minus y1 divided by x2 minus x1 then I'm going to define the y intercept which is b and that's because that's where we begin many things happen in the first quadrant where everything's positive so we begin on the y axis somewhere where x is zero so we'll connect this with the algebra that we we looked at you know how if how do I if if I know a point and an x so an x y value and a slope and a slope how can I solve for b a couple steps of algebra so then b is you know y1 minus m times x1 now I have m and b b solve print out the equation so this will just print out the equation and we'll see that it'll display nice y equals three x plus four and I still it will still by default give it as a float variable so three point zero it's not worth trying to cast it as integers because this is going to work for any number and then that way does not have to be an integer to to make this work so there we go knowing these calculate the slope calculate the intercept and then put it all together in the formula so then let's graph it same thing here defining my x and y points and I just kept these same points here so develop the equation m equals b equals just because we want to print it out so that we're going to print out the full equation and now we're going to go back to the graph that we were doing before define our x min x max now how do I want to display this line I can graph I can find two other points so I'm going to take the x minimum so we see here in the first line y3 I'm going to take the x minimum and I'm going to convert that times m plus b that's going to be my y value and then I'm going to take the x maximum times m plus b that's going to be my other y value so now I have these other two points basic setup for the graph same as we were doing before and we have now I'm going to plot that that line plot dot plt dot plot and my x values are going to be x min x max and my y values will be these new y values and I'm going to plot this as a red line so if I part if I put an o in here that would put these as two separate red points but just r makes it a red line and now when we run this there we go we calculate the equation and we graph the line good times so I can change anything else I can have any other two points there we go there we go two three and if I kept the same x value we know this actually some of this would break but it might still graph it but we know that that's not a function there so there we go six and I'll make this one eight eight just to show that we can just change these and all the rest of this will work solve for m and b get our equation plot them here and when I run it there we go so 1.25 x plus 0.5 and we see then it must cross the y-axis at 0.5 and then that slope up 1.25 over 1 there we go all right so now we can graph and do whatever you want with the two points you find now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and I'm going to work through extra problems using the CoLab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so we're looking at how we can apply some of the things that we've been doing to real life situations and use this information to predict things to figure out some trends and real life or things that show up in a textbook that hopefully are realistic enough so let's take a look at some examples here and we'll work through these so if we look at 25 a town's population increased at a constant rate in 2010 the population was 55,000 by 2012 the population had increased to 76,000 if this trend continues predict the population in 2016 so we want to notice that these are two x y coordinates time and population and time if you have it it's going to be on the x-axis almost all the time so if we look at this so 2010 55,000 2016 76,000 or 2012 76,000 so when we when we do this we have I could make 2010 the x value but I could say hey hey this is the beginning of this situation I'll call it time zero so in time zero it and 55,000 these are nice even thousand so I just might call it 55 so time zero the population is 55 and 2012 is when we have the next year so that's two years later so two and then 76 so we want to take notice that we're recognizing these as you know x y coordinates that we can put on a graph and we're going to use that we're going to predict in 2016 so let's take a look at how we would do that now hopefully you've already been putting together some things that you know that you can use to graph you know your co-lab notebooks so that you would already have this something like this set up you know graph you've already done the imports this is the only thing that we're changing remember this for the two points and then we're going to calculate the slope and the intercept and everything so x1 0 y1 is 55 x2 I would want that to be 2 and y2 is 76 so you see that that matches up 0 55 2012 76 000 and these this would then be the only thing you needed to change is your two points because all the rest of this you'd have this you know already set up develop the equation so you know we're going to calculate the slope we're going to use that to calculate the y intercept now we happen to know because we have x1 is 0 so we know that the y intercept is going to be 55 but that's okay we're going to print out the equation and then our classic graph now I would normally have this set at you know negative x min negative 10 x max 10 y minimum also negative 10 y maximum 10 so this is the other thing that we would change because we look at this graph and an x minimum of negative 10 so in time that would be 10 years ago but you know we're we're not going to worry about going in the past and making that negative 10 so I'll just keep it at zero and we I'll just keep it at zero and we can you know look at it from there then x maximum 10 we can keep that that's probably just as good you know we're looking at the most six years for this situation and y minimum I'll also make that zero actually because y is population so y minimum being less than zero would just be weird negative population they're not going to be in the upside down or anything all right or y maximum and I picked 150 because we already start at 55 and then we're going to 76 and we're predicting a few years in the future so I wanted to go up a little bit 100 didn't seem like enough so we could always change these so all we need to do is change these and notice all the other things for the line that we're going to graph so notice even though I'm printing out this line I'm still just using these x min and max and then two more y values to calculate this line and we're just doing the line that way there's other ways to do this but we can keep this for how we're going to display this line this this works for linear equations and we still keep our basic setup now here's where we're also add the details so again hopefully you have these and you could also comment these out and then use them as needed like I have these commented out about setting the x ticks and the y ticks we'll see if we need to we'll see if we need to change that and you might have the default x label as x values or y labels y values but we can change these here time and population and I like I like seeing the grid especially for this situation so I'm going to put that in as true so we have these details that is that you could you could have your setup and have these all commented out that all you need to do is uncomment them as needed and then there we go we're going to plot this linear function and then here's what it looks like when we run it so we figured out the equation so it's going to be there it is 10.5 x plus 55 so we see this trend and we see it starts at 55 increasing about 10,500 every year so year two we see yeah I'll estimate that as 76 year four and then year six this is what we want now this might not be exactly 120 we could we could plug that in and see because now we have the equation you know what what is the value at six years but also this is enough and that's why I didn't worry about changing the tick marks because the default that it gave us I think that actually ends up being pretty good so there we go as a good enough estimate I would say 120,000 for you know population estimates you know you know the fact that it might be you know 119,500 or something like that you know our rough estimate is going to be 120,000 and that works so you see and then we have our dice labels time and population the grid marks help so this is how we want to do this we can you know we can set up this equation and see the graph and that helps us answer all these questions there we go we see the trend and we can predict the population in 2016 that's about 120,000 all right now here's another one the number of people afflicted with the common cold dropped steadily by 50 each year since 2004 until 2010 okay so we're looking at our keywords here so dropped steadily then we're talking about a subtraction and then I'll make time zero 2004 since 2004 is the first not first year we we mentioned this now also a lot of these in real life yes they wouldn't be perfectly linear but a lot of times that linear trend gives us a decent enough approximation and that's that's the idea for some of these it's enough of a prediction so now we have in 2004 875 people were inflicted and notice even with the comma there you can definitely see there's your xy value year and then afflicted and then in 2010 it keeps dropping so one of the things that we can do here well this is find the linear function so one of the things we can do is I can make 2004 times zero and then that's 875 so if we take a look at this 2004 I'll make that time zero and then this one I'm going to make 875 875 all right so now if it drops steadily by 50 each year all we have to do is we just need one more point if this is linear so we can just do the subtract you can do the subtraction in your head here then if we have year one then it drops 50 so then that's going to be 825 and you see that's that's all we need two points and we'll be able to do everything else calculate the slope calculate the intercept and display the equation I might even well now the time and population won't mean anything so you know number of people afflicted you know okay how about how about cases number of cases of the flu there we go so there we go time cases and you can hit control or you can hit shift enter or click this and we see this trend negative 50 was still in the y equals mx plus b negative 50 x plus 875 and a lot of times you would see this they'd put the 875 first and and then subtract but that's okay now also this notice that you know my x y axis I'm not going to show anything why because it started 875 and you see 140 doesn't cut it so we have to go to x minimum and maximum that's fine y minimum that's fine but y maximum it can't be 150 maybe I'll call it like 900 so now we can see the graph and sometimes you know you graph it and you say well why didn't it show up and then you look and see oh it's the window out of bounds here so there's 875 and we see this downward trend so there we go and we can use this to predict you know in in any year now there's other ways to get the exact amount we can you know for any any year we can actually plug in that x value and then solve so that works and remember that even works within a print statement so if we have you know so the interesting thing is this plot dot show um that needs to be last so if I do another print statement I could I would do it later but I could right under here you know the same place where I print this I could print so print this I could print so what if the question was how many you know what's how many people had the flu we might say oh look at this two years later you know we had the now we we can do the subtraction so let's say like five years and you see given our graph here you know we see this trend we can estimate it but we don't know exactly you know it's not detailed enough to see it so I can say oh about in about five five years how many people were afflicted with the flu and supposing I want that exact number so I can go back to this and then x is five so one of the things you can do is in the print statement you can actually just do do the math and you can have like a more elaborate print statement if you want but we can just do our math here negative 50 times five plus 875 so we see you know our negative 50 times five plus 875 and that would give us the y value what would be the value what would be the number of people afflicted after five years and again you could have a more elaborate print statement to say something but since we already know what that question is now that that's 625 that that means something to me when I see it there so you see that that might be you know could I estimate it exactly oh that's 625 and not necessarily but I can plug in the number and get it so we see you know some different things we can do see the graph we can answer some questions do some math for you know some specific some specific questions related to this now all right all right linear function so here's another question when will no one be afflicted so we want to know looking at this graph when is the y value the number of cases going to be zero now rather than now one of the things you could expand the graph is the y value is until it gets to zero we'll come back and do that in a second but one of the things that we could do is if you already also have your setup to solve an equation so you know you have this and remember this was the whole setup to solve an equation and print the solution and so the only thing we needed to do here we keep this equation variable the only thing we need to do is put your equation there in this case i'll put it here h 75 minus 50 x and remember it's remember the python 50 times x so that's by default set equal to zero so when we run it so the answer is 35 over two interesting that gave us a fraction but there you go so that's 17.5 so 17.5 years it's going to be zero so yeah now again fictional numbers i feel like you know in 17.5 years from now no but it's not going to be that nobody has the flu or something like that but we can actually take a look at this and we can change the x maximum to 18 and then we can see this trend so we look at that you see then according to this trend you know time zero and that would be you know at 17.5 years and in this case according to these numbers who knows it may in some particular town but in 2004 so 17.5 or 18 years that would be like 2022 and yeah i feel like that would it's not that there's nobody afflicted with the common cold all right but anyway you see the trend though we see you know the these are realistic enough that we can use these to take a look at how we would solve these and this is what we want to use this math for predicting trends given the information that we have so here's another one where they even give you the partial line based on the graph they have all right so this is showing profit so this figure one is showing profit in thousands of a company in a given year x and they also do x represents years since 1980 so there we go if x if time zero is 1980 so then 20 so so 20 that would be 2000 and 30 that'd be 2010 we see you know there we go now given these we want to find the linear function all right so let's take a look at if i want to look at these i just want to find two nice points that i feel confident that i'm not just estimating the points so i like this first one at year five it was 10 000 now it it's interesting because it says y in thousands so therefore 10 000 would be 10 million you see so if y is in thousands then 10 000 would be 10 million in which case they could have just said it was in millions but that's okay and then we have so five i'm going to shift it to millions and just make the y value 10 so five ten and then let's find another nice point i like this 25 four so we can go back and we can plug in in these so i don't have that zero value and we're probably going to want that at some point so five years then we're talking 10 million and then at 25 years then we were talking two four four okay so there we go we have that point five years 10 million 25 years 4 million and since we already see this graph since i made them 10 i really could now we could we could take a look at this and say oh yeah 12 is probably fine as far as a y maximum and we could continue this to 30 or you know we can take it further so when i go to graph it zero x maximum 18 is not going to be enough maybe i'll just make it a nice round 50 y minimum fine y maximum 900 that would the scale would be so much it would this would just be in the tiny corner of the graph so maybe we'll just call that 15 or something like that all right there we go and for this one we could just delete this like the space in there we could just delete this and we have i'm going to print out the correct the equation so when we run it so here's our equation negative point three x plus 11.5 and we see this downward trend over time and here's another one where if i wanted to change these tick marks maybe i could change this to the x ticks is two enough yeah yeah maybe and then i can change the y ticks is two enough yeah maybe we'll see and we'll run it so we see we get much many more lines all right and we'll see what happens we see we get much many more lines all right and with that we see that the uh this is 38 now just because these end up being rectangles more i might change my y ticks to one i think i just like that better and you know in doing this you can you know change some things and go go there we go so with this then we can really see the trend there's your 11.5 and then we can see this downward trend down 0.3 so it should go you know over 10 it just went down three to 8.5 here we go and then 38 years later then they would have no profit because that's the trend that we're saying there we go so whatever this company is this is their profit since 1980 and then and then there we go um um 38 years later then they would have no more profit so who knows what company this is but you know our fictional company is you know something would have to change but that's where the prediction lines you know the the the simplest prediction is okay these would go in a straight line whatever trend would continue in a straight line unless something changed but we know then in uh normal business normal day-to-day life things do change and that's why our lines aren't always perfectly straight but this gives a often enough of a prediction oh and you see then time and then cases then we would change that to profit okay just just to make it official here time and profit so there we go another another situation and we can see where it would start and then profit declining and that's enough years that you know 11.5 million was a lot more money in 1980 and then profit declining and yeah so this this company is definitely whatever they were doing there you know they were in uh in sad shape all right and we have the y intercept and all that okay so we see another very very similar we'll do we'll do one more here so consider this scenario 2004 school population was 1700 by 2012 the population had grown to 2500 so all right and again assume assume the population is growing linearly all right now how much did the population now how much did the population grow so this a is really just the subtraction so 2500 minus 1700 is 800 so it grew that much and then the average per year you see anything per year the rate that's the slope and we can divide that but we're also going to then just plug these numbers in and you'll see that we can see the slope so 2004 maybe we'll call that time zero 2004 1700 2012 2500 and i might even leave the hundreds because we want it to be you know more exact we know that the population would be continuous it wouldn't just jump hundreds so 1700 and then y minimum and then we have 2500 so then after this if i wanted to graph this yes then my y maximum on the oh i put in the wrong so there you go time zero 1700 1500 and so in 2012 so time zero and then in 2012 so that's eight years later it was 2500 so eight years later then it was 2500 so here we go okay so we'll have that and x minimum and then the x maximum so let's just make it a nice even 10 and we could always change it if we need to y maximum 2500 but we're going a little bit further so let's make it 3000 and see if that's going to be enough there we go and do i want the ticks for right now see if you comment them out the graph will as we saw it will still give you the it will still give you the tick marks it's just that the default whatever python wanted to calculate and where you can force them into however often you want there we go and for school population yeah all right so we see it's growing by about 100 a year here and maybe that's you know depending on what you wanted to estimate these tick marks might be fine the grid might be fine and you know if you wanted to you could always add more change it you know i think that works out so growing by 100 every year and we can use that to predict so the average probably growth per year was 100 there we go 100 x so the slope is 100 and there's the equation for the population for two years after 2004 so we see you know we've done a few of these i think i think we don't need to do another population model but there's some other form there's some other uh practice problems that we see in other tech all these all these are coming from that uh textbook the second textbook algebra and trigonometry because that's a lot of good business applications in it so you know here's the idea that just the notation g equals f of p the amount of garbage g produced by a city with a population p so we can go a g equals f of p and that's how we would read that so it's a function of population and what that tells us is population is the independent variable and then garbage is the dependent and population very often is an independent variable that causes a lot of other trends so we look at that and we see the same type of thing the town of tola has a population of 40 thousand and produced 13 tons of garbage each week express this information as a function so now if we have this one of the things that we would guess is that if it's a function of population then no people would mean no garbage so in our y equals mx plus b scenario b would be zero and notice we because we only get exactly one point here 40,000 13 tons so if we wanted to set this up you know we want to look you know we know that we have the python scripts to solve this but if we want to set this up we want to take a look at at how we're going to set this up 40,000 is going to be the population and who knows maybe i might just call it in thousands and then 13,000 is going to be the population and who knows maybe i might just call it in thousands and then 13 tons same thing i'll just call it 13 um and then we say well that's one point where do i get the second one but we have to look at the situation would i think that it would start at zero zero and if that's the case then we could go back and say so here's zero zero and then remember our x values are going to be population so we'll call that 40 and then that's going to be 13 because it's in tons and therefore the x minimum zero fine but x maximum 40 is probably not even enough um 40 is probably not even enough because we start with that and we can expect that it increases and we can expect that it increases so then let's say the x maximum would be i don't know let's make it 100 and we'll see y minimum zero now 13 maybe make it like 50 we'll see see if that's enough of a y maximum so there we go and we can just write this in thousands and we can make this in tons so thousands of people tons of garbage so we have this trend here there we go 40,000 generates 13 tons of garbage and we can see this trend here so there's the rate here 0.325 0.325 x so remember the x value is in thousands so every thousand people according to this fictional scenario makes 300.325 tons so that would be about tons 2,000 pounds so that times 2,000 would be about 650 but then if that's thousands of people so that's each person making less than a ton of less than a pound of garbage maybe so again this is this is not the you know latest research this is you know a couple numbers that seem realistic and then what's the meaning of this and we would read this as f of five equals two so notice that the function like our functions in python that five is the input and any input or independent variable that's x or you know even though we call them p and g here so that input five and then output two so f of five is two so we would expect then that that means that when we're talking about 5,000 people then the 5,000 people would produce two tons of garbage so that's the meaning of that you know five is the input two is the output so in our x y scenario here that that's what that would mean that's what that would mean 5,000 people would produce two tons of garbage all right and so let's go over here to 89 and another one you see don't get caught up in the alphabet soup of of this as people use different notation notice the trend of of i would read this as g of a so it's a function of this input a so the number of cubic yards of dirt d is needed to need to cover a garden with a square feet so d for dirt is g of a and we read like that g of a and the common notation you'll see in just general math is f for function and then often we just go through the alphabet fgh for other functions we want to talk about in python and pretty much across computer science your function can and should have a much better name so you know that's something that computer science has an advantage of but nonetheless you'll see this all the time you know g of a so again we notice the trend a is the input that's the area and then given that area then how much dirt would it be so we have 5,000 square feet area requires 50 cubic yards of dirt so that 5,000 requires 50 now we're not even going to do any calculations to this but i just want to show you that it that would be g of 5,000 equals 50 so that's just how we would write that given that input you know area that we would know first then therefore how much dirt we need and that that would just be how we would we would write that there's we don't need to do any math to that right now and the same thing g of 100 equals one so 100 cubic yards or 100 square feet of garden requires one cubic yard of dirt all right and number and question 90 we'll see just another situation f of t so there you go some function the number of ducks in the lake after t years after 1990 so f of five is 30 so we know five is the time years after 1990 so in 1995 there were 30 ducks in the lake and then f of 10 so years so in 2000 there were 40 ducks in the lake and given these you see we can x y x y we can find the overall equation plot the points graph it you know make some other predictions but that's the notation here and this is what that means all right now 91 the interesting thing is for just answering these questions it this won't matter but this is not going to be linear but we can still answer these questions because each of these is still going to be the same each of these is still going to be the same now notice h of t and now in this case h for height but you know again another way of expressing this so as x y values x is one y would be 200 the h the h of one is 200 so that x value is t for time in seconds so after one second it's 200 feet up after two seconds it's 350 feet up and again this is not linear so the same things that we've been doing actually won't work for this but we can still get the meaning of each statement here and 92 the one to one is this is still a function but that each x value like each x value and y value pair up like that neither of them show up again but this is a parabola because we see x squared and we'll talk about parabolas later but the one to one that there's actually positive x values and negative x values that might still have the same y value so that's why it's just not one to one but it's still a function i don't want to talk too much about that we'll get to these these types of functions later but i just want to mention that in case you're looking at that and saying well what does this mean one to one so in number 60 now this is also not linear and you see the height of a projectile is more like something like this after t seconds here's the function h of t is the height of a projectile seconds here's the function h of t equals negative 16 t squared plus 96 t so that's showing that you know it isn't linear in fact it's a parabola because it goes up turns around comes back down okay so the domain anytime we talk about the domain that's the the x values so the domain is all the x values that are possible here and then the range this doesn't ask it but the range is all the y values and this actually has a limited range so uh because this is a parabola that goes up and then comes back down there's a maximum y value so after that y value after that y value there's no more like y values beyond that are not a part of the range because it'll just never get to those numbers then the domain mathematically the domain is all real numbers but realistically in the context of the problem time zero would be the first part of the domain so you see mathematically these other numbers exist and they don't break this problem but realistically if i'm launching something it starts at time zero and yes i know that we can talk about t minus whatever and talk about negative values because we're awaiting the launch you know and this is second so if it's like t minus 10 then it's you know the t value is negative 10 and that's 10 seconds until the launch but realistically we're we want this to be time zero and then the other one would be it does go up and comes back down so there's a time where it hits the ground again and beyond that it's not really within the scope of this problem so let's take a look at how we can solve this just because even though that's beyond what this is asking i want to find out what that t value is when does it come back down to the ground all right so negative 16 t plus 96 t we can go into this where we're going to import our symbols and instead of t we're going to make it x just because i already have x as a symbol so you could always change it and make a t that's fine so negative 16 and again we're going to use x squared minus 96 x and that's always the this is the equation set equal to zero and that's what i want what x value makes the zero now negative six would not be plus 96 t oh because i put minus yeah all right so it only gives us zero what if i have so i was doing this with things that only had one solution so storing this as a finite set and i just printed the first one but this does have two solutions you see and i mean i could get re i could get really fancy here and then actually just make another print statement but see this is my finite set it's not zero six as a coordinate it's x equals zero or x equals six and i could then put this zero and i could have another print statement there we go to show the first one and but this is just a matter of you know how you want the output to look okay so i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and show the first one and but this is just a matter of you know how you want the output to look and we have these you know we also have the you know which we looked at before you could you know loop through this to get solution to get multiple solutions but there we go yes x equals zero it's on the ground and then x equals six so that's another way that we could you know that we could graph this and we see that it back on the ground at six now this is a little bit ahead because we'll talk about quadratics later so yes we will we will not worry about graphing this because we'll get into this with quadratics but this gives us the solution that at six at six seconds later it's back on the ground so some projectile launched it went up and turned and i'll tell you this that you know halfway through these parabolas are symmetrical so halfway through it's halfway through it's uh at its maximum point so we could even print here what is that maximum point and we can do that math negative 16 here's what i'm going to do so halfway through that so that would be three would be x and you see that's really the idea that you know we set up the situation where i have x and then i can plug in my value so zero six zero zero six it's back on the ground so three seconds later it goes 144 feet up in the air so realistically then the domain for this function as that's that's practical not just like you know mathematically it exists but related to this situation the the only number the only x values that mean anything for this are anywhere between zero and six including zero and six because everything else doesn't really mean anything for this situation you know after this then if it keeps going down like it doesn't go back down into the ground and the y values here are between zero and 144 so that's my domain between zero and six including both and the range between zero and 144 so you know these are some things we can look at you know solve when does it equal zero and plug in some various numbers all right so if we look at 61 just again reading reading is these we might not even need to do any code for this we have this situation the cost of making x items is 10 x plus 500 and the fixed cost is determined when zero items are produced so find the fixed cost and remember zero so then if x is zero that 10 x drops out and then we're left with 500 that's why it's be gate it's b for begin you know when you know before we produce anything you know the fixed costs are 500 now maybe this is some sort of business and 500 is like rent and utilities and everything that even if they're there they didn't make anything they still had to pay all that and then they pay ten dollars for whatever you know for whatever they're making so then the cost of making 25 items would be 10 times 25 we just plug that in 250 plus 500 750 all right and supposing the maximum cost allowed is 1500 what is the domain in the range so if we have to set this equal to 1500 now if we take a look at this and i'll just again write this here so if we have 1500 equals 10 x plus 500 and notice i'm not this isn't python syntax because i'm not worried about doing anything with this yet but then what do i want to do i want to put this equal to zero so if i subtract 1500 from both sides then i get zero equals 10 x minus 1000 because if i subtract 1500 from both sides and so that's set equal to zero 10 x minus 1000 then that's where i could plug this in here so you see you can work out the math before you get to the python code so 10 and then here i do need 10 x minus 1000 so if that's the case now with this one i know there's only one solution so if i keep the other one that's going to give me an error i know there's only one solution so if i keep the other one that's going to give me an error so whatever it is we know that we could only make a hundred because you know maybe they only have that budget you know whatever they're making they make a hundred of them their total expenses were 15 total expenses were 1500 and then you know then we have to go out and sell whatever they are i don't know t-shirts you know whatever they're whatever else they're making all right okay so we and we see these same types of things we i just want to look at the setup of this that at the number 44 at the start of the trip the odometer on a car read 21 395 at the end of the trip 13.5 hours later the odometer read 22 125 there we go assuming the scale is miles so average speed we want to take notice that that anything like a rate like that that slope and we have two values time zero and then the miles 21 395 and then time 13.5 and then the miles and we can go through and plug that in whether i care about graphing this or not it still will output the slope which is the answer to this question the average speed and that's where average speed it would be a linear function whereas realistically we know especially over 13.5 hours the speed's going up and down you know sometimes stopped sometimes faster sometimes slower but we get that average speed we know that whatever that answers they're not going to that exact speed the entire time all right and 45 the driver stopped at the gas station to fill up his tank and he looked at his watch the timer at exactly 340 this time he started pumping gas in the tank exactly 344 the tank was full now if i was filling gas for four minutes especially with these prices these days i would be expecting it to be a lot a lot more money but he noticed he had pumped 10.7 gallons so surprisingly not that many not that many gallons but what is the average rate of flow of the gasoline so again time is going to be x so if we want to call it minutes we can call it four minutes and then 10.7 gallons so we could calculate to gallons per minute or and again same thing plug it in you know 10 well actually this one because we already did that subtraction is just 10.7 divided by four so some of these you know you have these scripts and everything available but some of these you might be able to solve even before you look at those or you could break it down into seconds how many seconds in four minutes and you know the rate of flow per second but that's just you know other possibilities gallons per minute is probably fine so we see all these situations we want to see like that recognize how we can set these up and the things that you're building that you already have to be able to solve an equation even if you know the equation is something else and you can just do one step of algebra you know because that's it you want to get it equal to zero so keeping in mind from from earlier that one step of algebra so then you have it equal to zero and you can solve it so you'll have these things set up solve any equation or you know graph a solution find the rate all that so you know if all you needed was the rate you know everything else here would be bonus but it'll still also answer that question for you so we want to see that you know different ways that we can interpret these questions and solve solve the problems graph them take notice of some of the keywords and hopefully you see how you can apply some of this to different situations that you come across you know look look for situations in in your day-to-day life and how you can apply these all right so hopefully that was pretty useful for you so when we talk about factoring in algebra then we're going to talk about dividing out something so any factor is something that we're multiplying and therefore i'm looking for things like when i see a number what am i multiplying so when i see a number like six then i can say oh what are the factors that's two times three and here i'll put the dot for multiplying to separate the factors so you know when i when i look at a number you know like 15 then what are the factors oh that's five times three and it's useful to be able to think about numbers and what are the factors because that helps us reduce fractions and simplify other other terms so for example if i had since i'll use these two numbers here supposing i had a fraction that was six out of 15 and i said oh well i want to reduce that fraction to lowest terms there's a better way to write this so then if i remember that they both are divisible by three that three is a factor of both of these then i can say six divided by three is two and fifteen divided by three is five and so this is the that reduced is five and so this is the that reduced fraction and i got this by factoring i recognized the common factors and i divided out those common factors so just like other parts of algebra if i do the same thing to the left side of the equal sign and the right then it's still equal here with a fraction if i do the same thing to the top as i do to the bottom but that has to do with just multiplying and dividing adding or subtracting doesn't doesn't work so if i have these i can reduce you know reduce my factors i can even keep going supposing i had something like six out of 24 and supposing i didn't recognize that 20 that six was a factor of 24 but i at least saw that they were both even so i could then divide by two six divided by two is three 24 divided by two is 12 i could start reducing again recognizing that common factor or then i could take it further oh three and twelve both divisible by three and then i could say three divided by three is one twelve divided by three is four so again i factored things out and therefore reduced the fraction now a lot of times you know we see things and we don't we see fractions and we we can't you know especially bigger numbers we don't right away think about the common factors and we can always do long division in a couple minutes i'll show you how to how to do this with code to set up a loop to find the common factors that way even if you don't see them or if it's a lot and you know how do i go through all these possible factors i'll show you how to write the code to develop a loop to do that find those common factors but this is one of the big uses of common factors another use and this is more related to other algebra topics we might not need this as much as far as writing code but if i have something like you know 4x plus 16 something like that and i say oh these two the four the 16 have a common factor which is four and i can divide that out and we can divide it out like this way so this is another use of the term factoring because i see these common factors and i divide it out 4x divided by 4 is what is 1x so i'll just put x and then 16 divided by 4 is 4 so and again this has more to do with other algebra applications but i want to show you this because this is also factoring out then you know if i have this i see the common factor and i can divide it out and it looks like this or i can distribute the 4 4 times x is 4x 4 times 4 is 16 and get back to that so that's another use of the common factor one of the other things we're going to do is talk about factoring out square roots and that also i'm going to show you how to do this but then we're going to look at the code you know how to find common square factors and then factor them out but let's take a look at this if i have a square root and sometimes we have square roots that don't work out evenly they're not perfect squares but i can factor them and sometimes that helps because that those factors cancel out with other things later so if i have let's say the square root of 24 now square 25 is 5 that's great square root of 24 almost 5 it'll be some long decimal because it's an irrational number but if i can factor that out recognizing these common factors and now in this case i don't want just any factor i want a square factor so if i remember that 24 is 6 times 4 that helps because 4 is a perfect square and then i can say so i want to identify these factors but i'm interested in the ones that are square factors and four square so the square root of four is two and then since i took the square root of four i still have that six underneath the radical so even if i can't square root the whole number i can square root part of it and factor that out so sometimes then even if i can't factor out something like the square root of 24 i can get it down to something like this and that's the simplified square root this factored square root and sometimes that's really useful now again bigger numbers things that you can't often think about oh is this a perfect square we'll talk about how to write the code to find these perfect squares and divide them out and even use the simpy library to display it in a nice way so that that's really the essence of what we want to do with factory recognizing factors of numbers and this is where even if you're going to write code the more you remember your multiplication tables the better things will be it just makes things you know come together a little bit easier but you know we're looking at numbers thinking about what factors made that number and then we're looking at common factors that we could possibly divide out and so let's take a look at that we'll take a look at the code so here we're going to do the same thing we were doing with working it out by hand finding the common factors dividing them out and it's going to work a lot better with writing code because it'll go through and easily find all the factors for you and to do that we're going to use the modules operator so modulus that is the percent symbol so on the keyboard it's the shift on the five key so what that does is that finds the remainder so i already ran it so if you print five modules three it's like five divided by three but the whole number answer doesn't matter we just want the remainder five divided by three three goes in there once with a remainder of two and that's what it'll print out the two and if we want we'll just comment this one out and uncomment this just to show you another one so 31 module is 10 so 31 divided by 10 is three but that part doesn't matter it's a remainder of one so when we run it it'll output one now that's going to be important for finding factors because a remainder means that it's not enough the number is not a factor but if the remainder is zero then it's a factor and that's what we're going to do use the modulus to find factors so i just picked this number 12 and we're going to put this up in a loop so in our loop so i i made this variable just called test factor so we have for test factor in range one to the number plus one because i'm dividing so i have to make sure i start at one if i start at zero it'll give me an error and i want to include that number itself so i have to do plus one otherwise it won't do that last number so for test factor in range and then we go to this line here if number modulus test factor is zero then it must be a factor so then i'm just going to print out the test factor so that's what this is going to do given my number 12 here it's going to run through that and try each number and see if it's a factor and print it out if it is so then when i run it see it prints there we go one two three four six and twelve all of those are factors of twelve 12 so how can i reduce fractions to lowest terms so let's take a look at this and i'm defining more variables here my numerator let's call it 12 denominator 24 now we know that this is going to reduce to one half and i'm going to define a variable called factor which is one that will be a factor and who knows for some things that might be the greatest common factor so now once i have my numerator to find the greatest common factor all right so for test factor in range one denominator plus one because that's really it i want to you know i want to go up through everything in the denominator beyond that the numerator it's not going to really work out so now if the numerator module so we'll do this line here if the numerator modulus test factor is zero and denominator modulus test factor is zero so for each of those if it's a factor of numerator and denominator now that's going to be my variable factor and then once i have that now i'm going to divide that out so i'm going to do numerator divided by factor and i want to cast it as an integer because that's going to look nicer when we do you know the sense of this is that they should be integers if they're factors so this is going to look nicer when we display it so once i find my factor and you know you know it could stay at one or it's going to get you know the largest factor i can find once i find that numerator divided by factor cast as an integer and i'll just call it n denominator divided by that factor cast as an integer i'll call it d and then we're going to print out the original numerator divided by denominator and then the reduced fraction and divided by d so let's run this and we see that the original was 12 over 24 and the reduced is one half so there we go we can reduce any fraction and you can even copy this code and use it within something else you have or you can put this as its own function and deal with it that way we'll talk about creating functions out of a lot of this code later on in the course so the first thing i mentioned about adding it let's just do this so we had the decimal to fraction code and you know this one we already we had an input rather than just have the number here i have this input i asked the user to enter a decimal number to convert and remember then that input gets stored as digits but it comes in as a string and we've done this before converted to a fraction so i go here you know the length of that input you know how how many digits minus one well convert it to an integer because i want to have an and minus one because that it that will come in as a string that'll include the decimal place so there we go then that becomes my exponent and then i'll still also cast that as a float number which is n and then as a fraction my numerator is going to be the my numerator here will be n times 10 to that exponent so what that's doing is taking that value and moving the decimal place so there we go so the so n has all those digits including the decimal place then this line for the numerator moves the decimal place and then the denominator is 10 to that exponent so now i have an integer for the numerator this will end up being an integer for the denominator and now what we're going to do is just like we were doing earlier i want to reduce that fraction so same thing factor equals one everything else i already had that same loop finding the greatest factor dividing it out and there we go inputting the decimal which is the original number that the person entered and then print the fraction so when we run it enter a decimal number to convert so let's convert something like 0.125 there we go and it took it and it reduced it to one eighth which 0.125 is one eighth and we can run it again just to see that if i have a point zero two there we go the decimal and then that's one fiftieth as a fraction so we can apply that code into other things that we've been doing all right now we're going to take it to the next level factoring out square roots so this is all good to reduce the fractions but remember when we square root something now this one if i just print math that square root there we go uh square you know the square root of 25 here is five great but what if i have something like the square root of 24 now that doesn't work out nicely and by default it'll just give me that decimal answer but what if i want to factor it and this is how we want to factor it i use square root of 12 as an example square root of 12 because underneath the radical 12 is four times three and then four is a perfect square so the square root of four is two and that comes out and then i have a three left over nothing else i can do with that so that's the factored square root we want to find our square factors and divide them out the square root of that there we go so here we have numbered a factor you could make it user interface but i just put it here n equals 12 and max factor i just made that one that's the one that will change and here's i put this as the key ingredient because this is how we get to you know if i have my loop where do i start where do i stop so the upper limit of math dot floor of math dot sqrt of n so i'm going to take the square root of that then that's going to be that's going to be some weird decimal number now i just did this math dot floor and then i added one i probably could have done math dot ceiling also but i just did it this way so take the square root and whatever you know math dot floor so drop all the decimal places you know not rounded just drop them all and then add one so that's going to be the upper limit and now we want to go here here so for maybe factor in range again starting at one zero would give an error to upper limit if n modulus maybe factor squared so you see i'm running through those factors and you know each of these is the square root factor so if i square n divided by that factor squared if that's zero then now that maybe factor is now my max factor so we go through and we're going to cycle through all these you know divided out does this work and once i get some factor that's what's going to be on the outside so then i have the results my original my original number the square rooted factor square factor and there's a reason why i'm printing all of these out here like this because we're going to build upon this and make it look nice in the next step but to show that square rooted factor square factor max factor squared and then the integer that's left over so for 12 since we had that example earlier we see that n is 12 and the square rooted factor is 2 square factor is 4 and the integer is 3 even though i called it integer that was just text it actually comes out as a float so what we have is that this gets to that factor 2 on the outside you know 4 was a part of our in-between step and then 3 and that square rooted factor and then the integer that matches up with 2 coming out that's that square rooted factor that's the greatest one and then 3 is the integer still in there so like i said we're going to use simpy to make this look nice import math import simpy and from simpy import symbols so now i have this there we go and same variables i had before upper limit there we go and it's square rooting it but then you know find a one more to see where the maximum is going to be the like the greatest square factor i could possibly have so then i have all these other factor and then square they're all starting out as one and i'm going to overwrite these so slightly different variable strategy so if maybe for maybe factor in the range if n modules may be factor squared then we have the max factor is maybe factor squared all right and then the other factor is n divided by max factor so we see here then this becomes the factor that i divide out because i'm squaring it here and then i have the other factor underneath the radical is that original number divided by max factor so then the output variables and to make this look nice we cast them all as integers so the square root of max factor because that's what i want the square root of it cast as an integer and then that's the square root that's my variable square root other factor cast it as an integer there we go it i mean it essentially will be but we need to cast it as an integer here other factor and then the output this is this its own variable output and we see it's square root times simpy dot square sqrt other factor that's what that output looks like in simpy and this presentation here we don't need a print statement in fact that uh that might not make it look as nice but this simpy output so i store all that as the variable and then when i output it here there we go it factored out as two root three and if i put it back to my other 24 that we were talking about before we know that that doesn't work out and so it factors that to two root six because it's six times four and then the square root of four is two and that's what we're doing the types of things that we would be thinking through we just want to translate that into code you know i'm thinking through all the factors of that number and which ones are square perfect squares so 24 i want to find all these factors that are perfect square and i find that it's four and then the square root comes out and then the simpy makes it nice so we can do this to factor square roots and there we go so we have this we can divide out common factors we can reduce fractions we can factor square roots and these are a lot of the things that you know we often do by hand in math and now you have the code that you you can do this you can do this now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use that use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so we're going to do a walkthrough of the first certification in foundational math now each of these notebooks there's five of them we'll do three of them for this course and then two of them in the next course but they were i also designed them to be standalone that you know the directions would be enough that you could walk through and be able to do all this still though i'm going to give you the walkthrough uh maybe you already did this and you want to check some things or maybe some of it didn't uh turn out as you expected or you're stuck somewhere so you can always jump to that spot in in this video and see so each of these steps lead you towards the certification and you know we've built upon each thing so the first thing you're going to do is make a copy of this whole notebook this notebook is read-only and this is what gets shared out to everybody so so you make a copy and that copy is going to be in your google drive uh and it will be in a folder called colab notebooks by default but if not you can put it in whatever folder you'd want it to be you want it to be in and this is the ongoing theme for this course you're building your resources so you're going to put this stuff in your google drive uh especially if you have other colab notebooks or something you could make a different folder for everything uh in foundational math one you know or algebra with python if you want to call it that so you make your own folder you're putting all these resources in there that you'll have so you walk through as you work through these you'll understand how to do all these things but then you also have some code that you can reference so you have this in your in your drive i already did this and then each of these i have as a different section heading and then you can click on the triangle here to expand the next step and with each of these being section headings then up here you have a table of contents that you can go through so later on when you build yours you you can jump to whatever part you want you know you can add the table of contents by just making each of these a section heading so you do need to acquire the testing library because this is actually self-contained you're going to write the code and then it's going to test the code that you wrote and see if it's correct or not so this cell you don't need to do anything to it maybe for other things you might do in the future you might take notice of you know how we import this other library as this raw.py file in github and really save it as a library locally here and then you'll be able to access it so this i have the note here you may need to run this at the beginning of every session and the only reason i said may is because maybe if you walked away for two minutes and come back don't count that as another session but these codelab notebooks they do time out the runtime will time out after 30 minutes of inactivity and that doesn't mean no typing that means no running any cell or even if you are really active all day it'll time out at 12 hours so then you you know you might say wait i haven't i've been active all day and why did it time out they have that time out too all these are security features that you don't just like leave it open for you know indefinite amounts of time all right so you're just going to get this library and you're going to run it and we'll take a look at this so click run and as this is going yep it'll save the library locally and then that's what it's going to reference so it'll say requirement already satisfied even though it said that don't think that oh why did i do this i already it was already okay that's just what it prints out and then when you see this test pass go on to the next step then you know you're good so it imports this and you know now you know now we have this library available and each step will use that to test it so these first four yes i do have add subtract multiply divide i know you know how to do these you probably even know how to do them in python but it kind of walks you through just gradually getting familiar with the notebook you might be already familiar with it but so you know we'll take a look so so we go through just you know two variables and then you're going to have one thing here with the comment change the next line now this was just add so there we go i'm just going to do a plus b and i'm going to click run and you see two plus one is three and then it said code test passed go on to the next step so we go to the next one subtract seven minus three so i'm going to do c minus d and i could hit run or i can hit shift enter which i'll do that time code test passed so this is just getting you familiar and then each of these imports the test so so you've run that first cell and then you have the test and that's what's going to check your code and tell you one of these steps in a little bit i'll do one that that gets it wrong and you'll see what what it'll tell you so here we go so we'll expand multiply and again remember multiply in python like a lot of things is the asterisk same key or most keyboards same key is the eight so just hit shift and it's above the eight there we go e times f all good code test passed and then we divide now when we divide here g and h now they happen to be integers and this happens to work out but if i had them as numbers that didn't work out if they were definitely defined as integers then i would have to do something else because if i divide the answer and if i divide it won't work out the answer will be a float but python gets pretty flexible with this you know i just define g equals h equals and when i divide it's not going to give me a hard time about whether they're integers or not it's just going to divide and there we go so you can and a lot of things that you might work through here if this is your your notebook you might just have things where you define your input or your variables right there in the code but you could also actually just prompt for input and so in that case you don't have to change the code because when when you run it it will prompt for input and then that could be the different numbers that that you want that way you don't have to worry about changing the code so in this case enter a positive integer it actually could for what we're doing here it could be negative but i just put that there and then we just cast it because the input always comes in as a string and then i need to cast it in this case as an integer to do some math to it all right so i need to do an integer or a float and then the only thing you need to do here is following that model i have string b and a lot of these have you know some code that something there that won't break the code but you do need to change it all right it's not just zero it's going to be this and you absolutely could just copy this and paste it there we go now what if i just change this now that's really all you need to do but what if i just said oh just for me i feel like you entered one i want to say enter another oh and i copied the wrong one and i want to cast it as a string as i want to cast as an integer so string b okay so if i have that now so i don't need to tinker with this at all so i might not but if i wanted to change this to another or something like that that you know we'll see all right so enter positive integer and another one eight there we go so what i was saying is if i wanted to change you know some little things that might not be central even if it gave an error it shouldn't stop you all right but this case yeah casting it as an integer and adding it we're fine if i cast each as an integer and then i went to divide it would give me an error oh but i didn't want to worry about that for right now we're defining them as integers we're just adding we'll cross that bridge when we get to it and we can get input and cast it on the same line so notice just open parentheses there we go and i'm going to do the same thing here i'm going to copy this whole line because that's really what i want to do all right now here's one where i really don't need to do anything else but supposing i just change that to another now just the way i have it see it actually just tested a bunch of these things because you know that's part of the line and part of the line and you know i really didn't need to change that word it so it'll tell me hey your into your input should be this now my point here is this will not prevent you to go from going on to the next step so you know maybe that's it maybe there's some something little in there that like why why did it say it was never it looks correct or something like that and maybe you're watching this video because that's where you were stuck it should not prevent you from going on to the next step and in fact you know that's fine you can say all right i see what what was different i'm not worried about it on to the next step but if you wanted to you say oh okay well maybe i just should have just said this you know you could always go back through and check it and then see there we go and then and then you can make your change so the whole thing is that this is supposed to be just you know a teaching tool check your code and then you know move on but you know not to get you caught in something that you know is preventing you from moving on all right now as i was mentioning about dividing casting things as a float so the float number allows for decimal places and most of the time i'm just going to cast things as a float anyway because just in case somewhere along the way i need the decimal places there's only a few situations where i might definitely need an integer certain simpy things to display we'll get to that soon enough and counting but other other numbers that i'm going to do math to it i'm going to cast it as a float okay so again prompt and then cast as a float we're really just going to do the same thing and that's okay you need you know if you copy you need to know what line to copy and need to know exactly where to put it but there we go and we don't need to change this enter a number enter a number and see now we will divide so i definitely want them to be floats because i didn't even say integer i just said a number so this is going to work no matter what somebody enters in and then when we take a look then you see it's waiting for us so i will do enter number three enter number four and 0.75 which is perfectly fine because they're float numbers there we go good times all right so order of operations and yes python knows order of operations so in case you forgot you know here's the acronym PEMDAS uh parentheses exponents multiplication and division addition and subtraction so you can and then remember the python syntax for exponents is the two asterisks so in this case what i wanted you to do is test your knowledge of order of operations we're not even worried about actually writing code here then you're going to put your answer here but don't don't really think about the code see if you can do this in your head what would this actual answer be and then you're going to put that here well you're going to put that here for your answer and then when you run it python is going to calculate the actual answer and your answer and then you'll see you'll see all right so let's look at order of operations everything in the parentheses first and then multiplication and division as they come up so uh four times two and then we have 14 divided by two so you can actually go back and forth multiplying and dividing all day so as they come up four times two is eight and then 14 divided by two is seven so then we're going to have one plus eight minus seven and so one plus eight is nine minus seven is two so then we take two now we're done the parentheses to the exponent two to the third power is eight and so there you go put your answer in there and there we go actual answer is eight your answer is eight code test passed okay so all these things and remember you can just like the other ones you can do all this you can put print statements you know all whatever math you want just straightforward math in a print statement python will do that for you so those are some simple calculator tricks you can do okay so remainder remember when we divide something that does not work out evenly we have a remainder and the modulus operator looks like a percent sign but if i'm using it in the code it tells me just what the remainder is there we go so as i have the directions here 10 divided by four is two but with but as a remainder so two and then two left over so 10 modulus four would give me two because that's the remainder or 14 divided by six will have a remainder so so if i do eight a modulus b and again it's the percent sign on most keyboards it's on the same key as the five but you have to hit shift so 14 divided by six now let's take a guess 14 divided by six is two with a remainder of two so that's what we're expecting to see the printout printout there we go now actually we could we don't need to do this but we could you know show well supposing if i had 15 divided by six so six times two is 12 so there'd be three left over and so a modules b would be three if you wanted to you can test these out because this particular code is testing did you do it correctly here so if you wanted to go back and try some different things whereas then if i go to 18 that works out evenly so the modulus would be zero there there would be no remainder and we can use that to find factors so we'll have an if statement here so if i have 20 modulus five so that's 20 divided by five is four works out nicely so 20 modules five the remainder would be zero so if that zero which it is then that means five is a factor so you see we're using the double equals to test it so that's what we're going to do here we're going to walk through this and we're going to cast this times we do want integers because factoring really only works with integers if you know we can divide a lot of things but you know if it's a factor there's going to be a nice integer in there so i'm going to just enter an integer so input cast it as int and that's going to be our number and then here next one enter an integer to see if it's a factor and again cast that as an integer and that's going to be test factor because i don't know if it's a factor yet and in the if statement i just have if number now remember whatever this is if it's true it's going to do that so if number exists which it will then it's going to do this but we're going to change the next line so what do we want number modulus test factor and then now if that divided by that gives you zero then we can say true it is a factor and then or else it's false it's false so there we go and enter an integer so let's do one that doesn't work so if we have 11 and five false and we can run it again and let's say make it 12 3 true so there we go showing how we can cast things and we can use that to test if something is a factor that that that itself might be useful but we're going to take that and we're going to build that into other things like this finding factors all right finding all the factors of a number so very similar to what we did but we're not asking for second input here we have the first input and then we want to find all the factors so now i have my for loop for test factor in range so i'm going to take this range let's look at this backwards here i'm going to take this range and if i just had one number in there it would start at zero but i can't have that because that'll give me a divide by zero error right away so i'm going to start the range at one and then end the range at number plus one because normally the range it won't do that last number so i have to add one and now to make sure whatever that number is i want to include that all right so now for test factor in in this range it's going to loop through everything every number in this range and one at a time like test factor is going to be one and then the next num next time through the loop test factor is going to be two so it will just loop through how for that many times yeah for every number in that range all right and this is what we're going to change the if statement so we want to say if it's a factor so number is our in is the original number we want and each of these test factors what do we want to do with it we want to say if number modulus test factor equals zero just like we were doing before we're just kind of putting it in an if statement now so i get this number and i'm going to loop through all these factors from one up to that number and i'm going to loop through all these factors from one up to that number and then if number divided by test factor gives me a remainder of zero then it is a factor so then i'll print it out all right so we run it and what do we have let's say 12 12 is a lot of factors and you see it'll print them all out 1 2 3 4 6 and 12 and we can run it again enter an integer supposing enter like 17 1 and 17 because it's prime so that's what we're doing just showing all the factors here this type of thing we will revisit this at another time to reduce fractions to lowest terms okay now what about prime numbers so a prime number is a number that the only factors are one in itself so we're going to and then anything that's not prime is composite so if i so if i have you know five is prime because the only way you can multiply to get there is one times five but six as one you can do one times six but you can also do two times three so you because you have those other factors it's composite so here now we're going to have same input and again integers because we're looking at factors and i'm going to start out with this variable prime or comp say being prime and then same thing range now notice i started the range two because one will go into everything and that's not what i that's not what i want that does that won't tell me anything so i'm going to start at two up to and including the number again not including the number because this this this time it won't include the number i didn't add the one there because again same reason i didn't have one one and the number itself yeah we know that those are factors but i want to find out from two through any of the other numbers if it's a factor and very similar then if number we're going to do the same loop and you could always go back if number divided by test factor equals zero there we go because we have the same variables here you always double check just in case the variable names change or a slightly different way of doing things but yes if that test factor works oh see because this is test number so this would have given me an error and and that's the thing with with reusing code yes we know we're all going to use a lot of copy and paste because that helps you know if it's a whole block of code but be really careful that it is exactly the variables and everything that match up correctly so you know a lot of times people do too much copy and paste and then they're lost because things don't match up so this one we call it test number so if number divided by test number if that has a remainder of zero then that means that is a factor which means all it has to do is happen once and that means the number is composite and it's only prime starts out that variable is prime and it stays prime only if it goes through and we never get a factor here throughout the entire thing all right so let's take a look if we have this and enter a positive integer so let's enter one let's say four composite right because i can also do two times two and then let's enter one that we have seven prime and that way you can check all kinds of other things you know oh some huge number is it prime is a composite there we go and you know now that you have this you don't have to change any of the code when you run this it'll you know it'll uh test it for you all right other interesting things reciprocals so writing it in math it's the number flipped so i have this reciprocal of two-thirds is three over two you see it just flipped and then any whole number the reciprocal of five is one-fifth because any whole number it's understood that it's denominator of zero or sorry sorry denominator of one so that'd be five over one so then that's why it's one-fifth as the reciprocal and you can multiply a number by its reciprocal and get one there we go pretty good so and there we go zero has no reciprocal because it'd be divided by zero so we can write the reciprocal whatever the number is we can just actually flip it one divided by n there that's actually all you need to do to find the reciprocal and some of these might be decimals but nonetheless this will find the reciprocal for you and we see our output here enter a number and what if i have the number as um five see point two but that's the decimal equivalent of one-fifth all right so just putting this in there showing you what you can do with finding reciprocals other things we can do with the input is supposing i wanted to have an output like this and are two numbers separated by a comma oh well now but i want to test each of these numbers so i can split it so this i'll store it as the variable nums still didn't cast it as anything and then here this is actually going to be an array in this case with two elements it's going to split it at the comma and then now this array sp has two elements so i have sp0 the first one i'll cast that as a float and then i have sp1 so that's it you know asking for it to be separated by a comma split the input and then then cast each of them separately so sp0 and then sp1 and notice the code here just says cast it as a float so float remember to close the parentheses over here there we go and then what do we want to do and that the directions here are then divide the two numbers so that's why we cast them as a float divide the two numbers and we have a divided by b all right so there we go split it cast it and in this case then we're going to divide okay so and our two numbers separated by a comma and let's see how about we do um this one will be a repeating decimal of eight comma nine there you go i'd notice if you have just one number repeating the fraction equivalent is that number over nine so point one repeating would be one ninth point two repeating would be two ninth and this one eight over nine so there we go okay now this is building up to something here is building up to you being able to factor square roots but let's talk about square numbers first so factor multiplied by itself is a square and it is kind of like the area of a square you know both sides would be the same or all sides would be the same so when i do length times width to get area they're the same and so is that number times itself and we would use the exponents that to the second power okay so all we're doing here is you know we're taking a number and then getting the square so in this case it's going to take the input as n and we're just going to square it there we go okay there we go number square all right five i'll put 25 okay so let's go the other way square root function so anything to the second power it's squared but what if i knew the result and i wanted to square root it so if i knew the area of my square yard but i want to know what's the side side measure so we have sqrt and that's the first thing we're encountering here that is not built into python so we have to import the math library and this is where colab really helps you out because a lot of times you might have to go through some other things to install things you know in other notebooks the colab notebook import math and you don't have it behind the scenes it works you just have to have the import statement all right so a number to find the square root definitely going to cast as a float all right and how do we get the square root of that once we import it it's going to be math dot sqrt and we call it a number n especially you know think even if things don't come up automatically just you make sure open parentheses one two close parentheses one two we got it so we're going to enter a number and we see here and remember to find the square root so we'll do one that works out evenly how about 16 square roots four and we can do another one that doesn't work out evenly how about 21 and it'll give you a bunch of decimal places i remember yep so 4.5 yeah about there we go okay okay other cool functions the floor function this is another one we have to import math to use it so the floor function so we have a floor function which just drops any decimals and there we go drops any decimals and sometimes called integer part or the greatest integer so even if it's like 3.9 it's going to drop and just go down to 3 the uh we have the floor function we have the ceiling function which as you can imagine if floor drops all the decimals ceiling is no matter how many what decimals are even if it's 0.1 it goes up to the next number and then round the one we use possibly most often round remember 0.5 and above rounds up and point anything less than 0.5 0.4 and down rounds down so we're going to look at the math that floor function here all right enter a number decimal place and we're just going to practice doing the math dot floor function here math dot floor of n so enter a number with decimal places so i'm going to call it 5.99999 and when i hit enter yep and that's the floor function even if it's 0.999 drops down to five so there we go and remember supposing you went back and said oh wait floor you know i'm upside down ceiling function supposing i wanted to do that then all right so um 7.1 because that should round it up to eight and so that code works but because that wasn't what these directions are it'll tell you oh you should include math dot floor and again if you end up trying different things it doesn't prevent you from going on but if you know either if you either if you spelled it wrong or something or you did something different it'll tell you there you go floor and go nine point three right good drops it okay so we're going to put some of this together finding square factors all right so a few things we've already done we're going to import math and what we're going to do is we're going to enter an integer to define the greatest square factor so i'll call that max factor and right now it'll be one and then the upper limit so notice we're stacking on these functions here uh the math dot floor of math that square root of n but then we're going to add one to it so we want to find the greatest square factor so whatever number you enter it in we're going to square root it that's going to of course have some bunch of decimal places and so we could do the math dot floor and then add one to it now i realize that now i realize that i could have just done math that ceiling and then skipped the plus one i for whatever reason i did this i like it so i kept it but there we go that's why yes uh so that gives us the upper limit square root of that number and then but we really want the next number now what do we have now in my range from one to upper limit so and remember this upper that was the square fact the square root factor i square rooted it first so for maybe factor in that range so it's going to go through and maybe factor is going to be one and then it's going to be two it's going to be three you know up to this upper limit so if n modules maybe factor squared equals zero so that's it these these factors if i square them is that a factor can i can i divide that out and if that is then max factor you see it's not going to be zero what's it going to be you know that's and that's the idea with some of these change one line so if you go through and think about what you're doing then we see yep i'm going through this range and maybe factor is it and then finding square factors if n divided by maybe factor squared if that gives a remainder of zero then max factor equals maybe factor so that's what we change there we go so and again knowing that these were the square rooted so for our purposes here we're just printed out squared so we'll see this here so if i have something like 12 all the greatest square factor is four because two you see it prints out square two squared is four that and that's a factor of 12 three squared is nine does not work out to be an integer here okay so here we're going to build upon that code and then we're going to have all of this because when we look at factoring out square roots that's kind of what we're building up to here when you have a square root that doesn't work out perfectly but yet you can factor it a little bit that's what we want to do here so i still have get the same integer same upper limit and i just put all these variables equal to one because we'll change those square root max factor other factor all right and then take a look at what this is doing same thing right because i still got that same upper limit and so still maybe factor is going through that range check for square factors just like we did before and then there we go and in this case max factor equals maybe factor squared squared there we go and then other factor is n the original number divided by max factor so there we go so what we have is the result is going to be that original number n equals this times this and we're just looking at how that divides out so in this case you don't need to change anything because i i thought that this was a little bit you know a little bit complex to try to follow like what what i was thinking through so i didn't through so i didn't didn't want to have you have to change anything and just take a look at what's going on here how we're dividing that out and then when you run it so if i enter an integer to factor maybe i'll do the same 12 here see 12 equals four times three or if i do this again let's say 50 50 equals 25 times two and again that first part is a square factor so now there we go the last four steps prepares you for this so factoring out a square root this is kind of what we want 12 if we look at the square root of 12 is four times three so then since four is a perfect square the square root of four comes out and it becomes two root three and that's what we're kind of building as we're building this code to do is this whatever is that square root number i'm finding the greatest square factor and then that comes out because the square root of four is two two is on the outside now all right and in doing this we're going to import math because we have square root and for our final output we're going to import simpy and symbols because that's going to give us a nice output at the end that looks like this so that's the thing you know that's the thing you know python outputs a certain way and then if i wanted to output that looks more like math symbols that's what we have symbolic python using our math symbols so similar input without the radical and our square root factor using those same variables dividing these same type of thing where we're finding maybe factor and then max factor now in this case i kept it like this maybe factor squared so the max factor squared max factor squared and then we divide so now we do the output so i am going to square root it again yes and i realized that up here there's maybe factor squared and then down here i'm square rooting it again and the key is casting it as an integer because this will be an integer at this point oh did not want to do that there yeah because this will be an integer at this point casting it as an integer okay so that's the square root and then remember other factor out here was my original divided by that max factor and if there's anything left over other that's other factor down here i'm casting that as an integer and you know that's it i'm just taking this other factor but casting it as an integer and you see that you can do that with variables so now it's now it's an integer and now the output is square root which was this variable up here times simpy so this simpy dot square root is different than math that square root and using this simpy output i want that to be my last i want to be that to be my last thing is this output so down here after it does this for the test that's why output the word output shows up here we store it as this here but notice it's not a print statement it just says output and the last thing just says output and it will display it so these types of simpy displays sometimes just need to put that there output as the last thing okay so what do we have uh let's take a look at our um let's take a look at 50 as we were talking about before so and just because this came first that's why it says test passed here and then we see the output but 50 factors out to five root two and if we run it again then we have you know go back to our 12 12 is two root three and we can see how we can factor out these square roots so there we go this is now one of the things that you can do and this would be a bonus we could do this later is we already talked about functions you could put all this in a function you know all you know you don't need to the testing part but the output you could put this the testing part but the output you could put this all in a function that would factor square roots for you so just like you have math that square dot sqrt to output the number which may be a decimal you could actually make your own function that would do all this and then output a radical you know like this so some interesting things that you can do and that's kind of what i wanted you to see the build-up of this and how we can use these you know loops and factors and do this to factoring a square root which is something that's you know pretty interesting in math useful for some math you get into and then you can write code to do it all right here's some rounding just interesting things so if i just say round it'll round it to a whole number if i have something like this if i round comma and then have a number that'll tell me how many decimal places and if i have this round and it's a negative number that'll be for big numbers so that will give me that many zeros so there we go so first number rounded to the millions the second number rounded the sixth decimal places so and i do need to go back to my print statements print round and the first number six zeros so i have to make it negative six and then the second one print round be and i wanted three decimal places so it'd be three there we go and we can print so that there's my six decimal places and you see then you know i don't want it around to the next integer it already is an integer but i want uh 14 million 14 million 500 thousand rounds to 15 million and then the next one yep rounds to 007 of course all right there we go and fractions decimals and percents percents so we could see here and we've done some things like this before that here we're going to take the input as a string see i'm going to import math for for later take the input as a string and as a string every string has this built-in len which is the length of that string so i want to take the length of that string and then i need to cast it as an integer now remember the person who enters this in is going to put a decimal place so that's why i have to subtract one because i don't want that decimal place i just want how many decimal places without that dot all right so that's going to be the exponent and then now that i've done that now my input digits i'm going to cast that as a float so the numerator is going to be n times 10 to that exponent and i wrote it all out just to make it clear what we're talking about here so anything with three decimal places it's going to be times 10 to the third and move doing that is going to move the decimal place over and then my numerator is actually going to be an integer and the denominator is that 10 to the third oh 10 to the exponent oh 10 to the exponent there we go so there's my fraction and this is really what we're doing anytime we're converting fractions but now we're just writing code to make it easier so how many decimal places that's really what this is essentially doing here how many decimal places am i talking about and then that number times 10 to that those decimal places 10 to that exponent and the denominator is 10 to that exponent so then the percent because now that i have it as numerator denominator now i actually really can just go back to n if i want or i could put numerator times numerator divided by denominator whichever one but i could do n times 100 which it's always times 100 because it moves the decimal place over and so that's it that's the first two digits are there are your percent so n times 100 gives you the percent and we can run it so if i have somebody enters in something like point one two five five there we go so the decimal is point one two five the fraction is one two five out of over a thousand and the percent is twelve point five percent so there we go converting any input fraction decimal percent percent and this is where i was saying that you could you could define this you can define a function here where you can execute a block of code with one command so you know here's the function definition d e f and then the name of the function open and close parentheses that may take input but they don't have to and then input indented four spaces one two three four so d e f name of the function colon anything in the function it can be as many lines as you want and it can have comments just indented four spaces and then there you go here's one something outside the function and then that function is defined and then it's it's then called it it won't do anything until it's called here so i could have this function definition and if i took out this line it wouldn't do anything again so now it'll have this is outside the function then it'll print this is in the function and then back outside the function there you go now change the name and remember to call it so there we go and then we want to run it then change the name to fun because it can't spell function without fun so if i just change the name i'm gonna call it fun and now i'm gonna call the function so that's what is the function call is when i you know when i tell all right let's run that function now there you go same thing to show you how to define a function and then call the function and then here's one with input so it can take input any input we're going to call an argument so there we go um now right here it's telling me that it's uh you know called greet a function called greeting it's going to take this input which will store its variable name that's within the function here and it's going to print hello whatever the name is now here outside the function so notice at the end of your function skip a line at least one line so then that's the break and now this is definitely not in the function and then the input and casting it as a string which is it is a string and we'll keep it that that way what is your name and notice inside the quotes that slash n will indicate a new line so now when we run the greeting you see it's passed you know i take that variable and i'm going to pass that into the function so now that function takes input and then it's going to be this variable and then it'll do the greeting so here you go what is your name head hello there we go and now now that you see this working this is just changing the this because it's like remembering where these are so you know greeting and then when we call it i'm going to change this variable here there we go so we see you know where these variables are especially in a small simple function like this so then you see you know this variable how do how do i pass it to the function as an argument there and then in the function definition it's expecting input and doing something with it but the function of this should actually be the same go yep see all good and these functions which is kind of cool you could have more than one input so we have this so i can have multiple input in this function and then in this case you know do something with it well we're just going to add them all but you you could use this for any formula you have you see like i just made this add but you can use this for whatever formula you have make a function out of it so notice here you know the third i'll leave this as three and then it's going to expect three inputs a b c and then a plus b plus c c and now down here i have to call it with all three variables so now notice this variable existed before but then it just stayed there floating not doing anything and then we have here you know now that we have have this i'm going to call the function with all three inputs because the function is expecting three inputs and then it's going to do something with those and so there we go so we see enter a number and i'll enter a number and another number six another number seven oh because there you go five and six is eleven plus three is fourteen so there we go hey fun with functions now all the this function and the ones we had so far they included a print statement as a way to show output and that's good but we could also have a function with a return value so notice this function here then it just returns that that value and what that does is it returns it right where you call the function so notice that right where you call the function so notice this if we're going to take this enter a number you know there's our input it's the float i don't know stored as variable a so now what i print is your number multiplied equals and then right here it's going to be that function i call that function with variable a and that's what this is and it's just going to take it times two there we go all right so notice some of these you run it and then we're going to change something and then run it again so enter a number all right there you go 16 your number multiplied is 32 so all we're doing here is changing the return statement multiply it by three instead everything else we actually can keep the same there you go enter a number 16 enter a number 16 and it's 48 so that's the return statement is right where you call the function that's where the number shows up your number multiplied equals and then returns that so that's pretty useful sometimes because we want that to just be where you know where do i want this output to be right there and so we put the function call there so that's the return statements good useful statement here so we have all these different things we have all these functions we you know we're looking at factoring we're looking at solving some things you can even just solve for x and there we go x as the classic unknown now notice here we're importing simpy again or for our symbolic math and we're going to take it even further from simpy we're going to import symbols and from simpy solvers we're going to import solve so all these now i'll just define it here x equals symbols and notice it's just x in single quotes so that's telling us that we're going to use x as a symbol in math and the way that simpy solve works is the equation has to be equal to zero so at what i'm going to do all right well we'll see here's the output solve for x and i even have this here zero equals and then you're going to enter it in now what this does simpy has this built in solve and notice the output's going to be right here so that solve we know that behind the scenes it has a return value so solve that equation using the variable x and this is just like a subtle thing that we'll talk about at another time but this returns a finite set and for this we're going to say this is the first answer that we want equation zero so enter an equation and then this is going to output the answer there we go all right enter an equation and so if i have let's let's do like you know two times x minus eight so we can see that x must be four four and i'll put it there now if i didn't have this i'll do the i'll do the exact same thing two times x minus eight it just the way it displays it because it's a finite set now that also opens up the door to possibly if i put in something that had more than one answer i could do that and that works too if i have let's see i'll run it again so supposing i have now this will work even if it doesn't work out to a nice integer but i'm going to make this work to a nice integer x squared minus nine you see negative three and three it does have two answers and it'll output both of those so this one you know and enter an equation function x minus four so there we go if you didn't get a syntax error you're ready for the project so different things you can do so this is where we now can make make your own functions and this is where i leave it open to you how you could do this you know make your own functions like you could take one of these functions here like the factoring the square root yeah so you could take this factoring the square root and copy all of this and all right so as an example of something something you could do and down here you could make this a function so you could do this now what's interesting is you as defining the function here uh you could define it factor sqrt and we definitely want input and i'm going to make it n and i'm going to make it n so we could do this that it factors the square root and you could make each of these then you have to make sure you indent everything indent everything now since we're factoring square and we don't need that input then we can actually delete that and here we go use you know we can keep all these and this is the thing with a function is you do want everything to be and you can take out things like notice what it's doing in the loop there we go then this has to be indented and this has to be indented there we go and all of these divide up we can even keep these and we see that we have output okay okay all right and this part we don't need you know and what do we want to do we want to do we can backspace that okay yes this stuff does not have a test because this is so what you have is you can define that factor square root and then down here later we could try to call it factor square root and you know uh let's see 20 yeah and and oh maybe I have to return the output it's actually kind of funny that just popped up but there we go so you see the output but because it's in a function we have to include that as a return statement all right so this is you know this is not the part of the function but everything else is and these are some things you can do because then you can you know different ways you can just define them in your own you know colab code cell with some text ahead of it you could you know you can make them all functions but that's the idea and then you could create a menu if you wanted to where you just have um which one you know what function should you run should you run you could do a table of contents there too and then that's the that's the project you're building this multi-function calculator you're putting all these things together into a colab notebook that you're going to be able to use and it's going to be your multi-function calculator and then as of making this video I can't tell you exactly where to upload that that code but hold on to it and then you'll see where to put it together for you know officially getting the credit for passing this part of the certification and then maybe on to the next part all right so hopefully this was useful you know how to work through this and how to put all this together into this certification project and you know we want it to be you know that there's more than one way to do all this so find find a way that works for you you know making your own calculator all right and we'll go on to the next project so with graphing a system of equations we're looking at really just graphing two equations on on the same x y axis and we want to see where do these two lines cross that's going to be the two lines cross that's going to be the solution to our system of equations so as an example here we have two equations and this one's y equals three x plus ten and this other one is y equals four x so let's say I don't know it's a place you like to go let's say costs you know four dollars admission so four dollars times x which is every time you go then y would be the total cost and then they have a deal oh well if you pay ten dollar membership fee then your admissions three dollars so there you have the the decision like okay well with this membership fee my admissions lower but when would these be the same price you know how many times would i have to go for these to be the same price so we want you know that's just one example of the of you know the use of this so i put these both in y equals because we're going to get into some other ways to solve this but we're looking at just how this graph plays out here so if i graph that y equals three x plus ten so without numbers here we're just going to estimate let's say 10 is here and you know that's how we plot begin at 10 and then up three over over one and let's just say you know it's something like this and let's just say that's the line and then we have y equals four x so there's no beginning it begins at zero but it's a steeper slope you know be at zero steeper slope and then let's just say you know it looks something like this and then they cross somewhere where do these lines intersect that's going to be the solution to our system of equations and let's just imagine that there are numbers here and it was you know somewhere around 10 so you know let's just say that that would be like 10 you know 40 something like that you know i see the invisible numbers on there so you see where these cross and depending on what you're using to graph you know it might be clearer to see might be harder to see but we can then always test it oh if i see it looks like that's where that's where these lines intersect we can plug that in does that work for each one so if x is 10 so it would be three times 10 plus 10 and then y would be 40 so our question is does that work three times 10 is 30 plus 10 is 40 yes that does work and then it would be the same thing you know four times 10 and y is 40 and then that works so that's how we would confirm it and if we were doing this you know old school plotting a bunch of points i could always put you know my x y table and plot a bunch of points i was using graph paper and what we're going to do though and the reason why i didn't worry about getting this you know these exact details this is not drawn to scale is because i want to just you want you to see you know the the way that this comes together two lines on the same graph my question is where do these lines intersect and then next we're going to look at the code how can i set up a graph how can i plot two points on the same graph and you know for whatever the answer might be however you know minute the fraction or decimal might be how we can find the solution each time so now let's take a look at the code so if you remember graphing one equation on a on a cartesian plane this isn't going to be that much different one of the big things though is we're going to use the numpy library instead of a loop so we'll talk about that more in a second but the first thing we need to do is import it here import numpy now you know this plt that makes it a lot shorter instead of writing that plot live dot pi plot numpy we shorten it you know it's just a little bit shorter but np seems to be the you know the common abbreviation so we're going to do that and you'll see np dot this and dot that throughout throughout this code so like before we are going to define our our range x min x max y min y max there we go and one of the things with the numpy array is instead of creating a loop like we were doing before what this does is this defines an array of x values and the first thing we need to do then is to find how many points i want to plot so i'll take these x values you know notice x max minus x min so how many values i have there and that should give me an integer number but i'm going to say 10 you know 10 times this number that's how many points i want that's actually going to be for linear equations you really don't need that many they it displays very nicely for anything with a little bit of a curve on it that's probably plenty and for some more complicated graphs you might do more than 10 so that gives me the number of points i have and just again based on these so if i change the window then this updates automatically and then here's where i'm going to define the array of x values once so using that library np dot linspace and it gives it takes the arguments x min x max and then how many points so there we go it's just going through these where am i going to start and and how many points in between and i'm just storing that as x because i'm going to use that as my x values hopefully this is looking familiar setting up you know the window size the axis for x and y and here's where we're going to plot line one so in this case i have y1 equals two times x there we go and what it does is that will take each of these x values rather than me needing to create a loop it'll go through each of these x values and plot them and then i have plt dot plot x and then y1 so here we go i have this and the second line i'm gonna do the same thing y2 equals and this one i took it beyond linear i just made x squared minus three just to change it up a little bit and so there we go that's my second y value and here we go what do i want to plot here x the x values and then y2 so there we go to find the x values and show the graph so when we run this there we have it we have our each axis that first y1 is a linear equation light blue line and y2 was the parabola now that's a pretty good parabola just to show you that if i had fewer points let's just say even two times this yeah that's probably low enough that you're still going to see this become choppy yeah wasn't that bad but if i really only have one times this then it really becomes a lot choppier because i'm only plotting every integer and there's a lot more going on here but you see how that linear equation yeah straight line worked out just fine but this one yeah so that's why just as a default i'll do 10 times that and so there we go and then to graph anything else all we have to do is change these y1 okay well how about if i oh okay well how about if i make this like negative negative 3x i'll just leave it at that oh because three times x there we go if you write it by hand you know doing the math often you know you forget the multiplying so that's the key python syntax you have to remember there you go um and let's take a look at this and maybe we'll make this one um there we go just to the third power how about that so there we go another linear equation and this one here cubic and we'll run this there we go and we see you know even this yep the curve looks nice so there we go all you have to do is change y1 and y2 and you actually can graph more than more than two but a lot of times we're going to do linear equations and have two lines on the same and our questions where do they intersect so there we go numpy and use that now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here okay so i want to show you just a few other things you can do with graph with graphing and one of them is shading in between lines or just in general above and below so if you have an inequality you can shade above the line or below the line we see we don't need to import anything different this should look familiar from the graphs you've been doing set up x min and maximum how many points and then you know linspace for your array and we've been doing this before here's the line and then we're going to plot that now this one if you're doing an inequality you could also add the other argument of making it a dashed line but this might be hard to see this line but here's the twist here the fill between so we're going to say from x at still the same x values and then the fill between is between these two y values from y1 up to 10 and you could define that as a definite number 10 you know we've already set our maximum or you could actually say up to y max like that's another way to do it and this one we call it you know we want to make this red so that takes the other argument python will give you a default but you know you can define these and that makes it a lot better so there we go the fill between same x value and then you have the range of y values that's the way that's going to work and we'll do a few lines here we'll make make some art so line two you can see again the familiar define the line and then plot there we go but then we're going to do the fill between between that x and y2 and y1 so you see you can define it even you know this one i'm going to go up to the top this one i'm going to go up to the other line and then we're going to do the fill line and here we go so fill line three very similar and there we go each of these i'm defining a different face color and this one's going to be green where am i fill in between i'm filling between this one that we've defined up here y3 and y2 so that's so these are just these two line are just going to be a band and here we go i can do this one between uh graphing another one and notice all these are just simple linear equations to show you this and we're graphing between these two so what happens when we run this so we see we get the first one from that line up to the top and then from there to there from there to there and there we go so if the second one if we had let's say all right we see this red we see this yellow so if the yellow one instead of ending it there i went up to y max it would just overlap and i know you might be you might have been thinking hey you might have might turn orange you know yellow yellow and red but actually it's the order of things that it graphs this that was red but then then it graphed this and then it overwrote the red and if i wanted to i still call it a line one but if i wanted to move that down here so now this is yellow and then this whole thing would be red and remember because the yellow started down lower so the red will go on top of that but but it didn't go down this far so the red didn't cover this so we see you know that's it you know the yellow line was x plus three and then the red line was x plus six so you still had that little gap that you know when the red went on it didn't totally cover the yellow all right but then we can you know y1 and now this one i definitely need to put this one back because y1 wasn't defined yet so you see it gave me that little error there so just i'll move it back and make this official before we go on to the next thing and we can see so since i've moved a few things around before we run it let's let's change something else here i was saying that we need we could do the dashed line so we'll make the red line and the yellow line the dashed line and it might be hard to see but we will hope you can always hope here so single quotes and then i'm going to make it a dash and i'll do the same thing with this one the other argument single quotes and i'll make it a dash so that those two would be dashed lines instead of a solid line it's hard to see it's a little bit but you know there we go and because these you know with the shading sometimes you might not even need to plot the exact line i mean mathematically you might just be in the habit hey i want to also show that line but the way it shows up on the graph you know it's not you see the dividing line it you know it's nice but sometimes you might say oh okay if i'm making some sort of art sometimes i might not want or need that extra line so there we go so there's some different things you can do you know draw lines shade above and below and you can be you can get creative with this and make all sorts of of all sorts of things and this is essentially you know what vector graphics are you know not you know defining each individual pixel but defining the lines that you draw based on equations and then that way you can scale things because let's say i wanted to scale that if i just change the dimensions of my graph i could scale this line with the same code in the same equations so that's the advantage vector graphics you can make larger things but with not much bigger file size because it's all defined on equations anyway so there we go some some cool things you can do with that other cool things you can create an interactive graph all right and with interact interactive we're going to set up some sliders this one's called interactive if you might come across some python code that defines sliders that actually uses the word slider that you know that works too but here's what we're going to import there we go in line and the inline part is going to get us to be able to adjust these sliders and see the effect on the graph right away so there we go and then this interactive widget so i'm going to define all the graphing notice is going to happen within this function so i'm going to define this function so again i made it a simple slope intercept so i'm going to define the function of m b and then i put another variable for zoom so notice all of your dimensions here are based on that variable for zoom and then we still have the points and the plot that's my y value mx plus b so now this function takes these inputs and here's the slider it's really the most of it is right here on this line is right here on this line so interactive plot now i can make that whatever variable i want i just decided to call it that and interactive open parentheses so the first thing is what function am i going to run and i made it f and the main reason i made it f is so that the line this line of code was not that long but there you go what function am i going to run and then let's define some ranges here m will go from negative 99 b will go from negative 99 and zoom will go from 1 to 100 so notice the zoom i could make it really small and x min max you know i could zoom it all in it's still going to be square but i could zoom it really into just one in every direction or i could zoom it out to 100 and i could change that number as i see fit so there we go so what we have is this and when we run that interactive plot it's going to take the input from these sliders and then run this function so let's see how that works so a lot of times the default puts everything right in the middle so my slope is zero and b is zero so you might be able to see that the axis is black but this line this blue line is on there because it's a slope of zero zero what what happens when i move that up see look at that now i have a slope of three and as i move up b then it crosses the y-axis at a different place it begins right there now we see it starts right in the middle at 50 so i could bring this down and you see i can zoom in pretty cool and see this is what i zoom if i'm so zoomed in one every direction notice b was five so that's off the graph now i'd have to move that back now you start seeing it on the graph and these are some cool things you can do with your graph you can add this interactive even if you you know you're graphing all kinds of things you just want to change the zoom this is a nice way to zoom and you know you might see some things on other calculators where you can zoom and here's how you can write the code you can have your own graph that zooms in and out and you can adjust some other things so there we go some cool some cool things you can do and i just want to you know it's a good way to illustrate you know slope and intercept as they change how does the graph change you see and then i can make b negative and therefore across the y-axis down here and i can change the zoom you know all the way all the way so now i'm really zoomed out and it it looks like this might even cross it zero zero because it's so tiny it only crosses at negative three and my graph is so zoomed out but there we go some interesting things you can do with zooming and you see that just you make that interactive plot and then your function all the graphing happens in that function okay so here's another interesting way to graph we can actually because all this math is going to lead you to working with data science so let's just get a little taste of it here that somebody else created this library this mediostat library for getting just some basic weather information um here's you know the weather information that they take time average temperature minimum temperature maximum temperature precipitation snow wind direction wind speed this is the wind gusts the maximum wind gusts air pressure and the amount of sun so there you go planning setting up your solar panels you can calculate the hours of sun at a particular place uh planning to set up your wind turbines you can calculate wind speed at different places and here's how this works this one you do need to install this and so we're going to run pip install install this and so we're going to run pip install and i just made that its own separate it's a its own separate code block and there we go we just see that this stopped running and that installed this so there's a lot of things already built into colab you might have noticed we've imported some things but didn't need to install anything this is a newer library and therefore it's not already built in so some of those newer libraries the install i mean it's really pretty straightforward pip install mediostat done so install that library now we can import it date time that was our i was already at python library but we just do need to import that and then now we still need to import this because we're going to plot this this data so that's why we import that and then the install enabled us to do this import these i've included the link here you know for all the documentation all right so here's how it works start we'll define these variables and they take this date time year month day year month day so i decided let's do like the first half of 2022 and so we have uh uh created a point now the point you create this is latitude and longitude so they don't have really built in like type in the name of a city you want to have an idea like let you know where you live you can find it like an exact latitude and longitude of where you are you can find latitude longitude you know somewhere you know if you want a particular city somewhere in the city so the example that you might see if you look up look this up you know somebody uh did this for british columbia so i changed it and did this for philadelphia so there we go so here's a point in the middle of the city and we can just get the data here so from that point so there we go data daily and then um there's my data point philly and start and end so there we go so we have this you know start date you know start date end date location and then collect the data it seems like this would overwrite it but this does work using the same variable data equals this data equals data dot fetch so there we go it works out and this one i just said hey let's just plot the average temperature so notice it looks very similar data dot plot and then down here we have plt dot show but there's nothing else we need to do it actually all the rest of it the dimensions and even some other things the way it labels graph happen automatically so there we go we just have y equals and then we're going to plot these three things so when i run it we see the average temperature there we go average min max so all these things we know in a previous video we were talking about you know how to create a legend how to label the axis and everything this already does all that for you and it'll just graph it'll just graph what you have here all right so there we go and notice the temperature is in celsius so there you go if you're in philly you're like hey it hasn't been 30 degrees here in a long time but yes this is celsius so notice it's going way above that yep june july pretty hot and then we can just change this that we can have temperature average maybe we'll we'll keep that and maybe we'll do one of the other ones precipitation prcp there we go so we'll graph this and we see so average temperature and then precipitation there we go pretty cool and we can see and of course then you know there there is another one here snow now what you can see is all right if there's average temperature below zero and and then precipitation then you'd expect hey maybe there's going to be snow but we can add that and you will see so there we go snow is in green and you'd think look at that average precipitation and there's precipitation and below average temperatures but no snow precipitation below average temperatures but no snow or below zero temperatures and yep it's kind of weird but it happened but just there we go here beginning january some snow february some snow and there we go that's it so interesting things you can do and you know even we were talking about having this on your you know having the colab app on your phone you could have you you could have something you know related to uh you know write write another line in here to get you know to get today's date or yesterday's date and sort you know use that as the end date and you know have your app and click on click on something run it and you know see the historic temperatures or snowfall or wind up till now if that's interesting you could do some other things with this so just some good things we can do with graphing and you see just getting a little bit of taste at how this is why python is so good for data science because a lot of people make these apis that you can just write a few lines of code and get the get the data you need and automatically graph it it's pretty powerful like that and you see the the graphing that we end up doing is the same you know map plot library so pretty good some some cool things you can do with graphing and uh we'll continue on the theme that you know next we'll look at solving equations and graphing you know all together which ends up being tricky but we'll show you how to do it okay so yeah take a look at this tinker with it you know set up some you know some you know weather weather report code for yourself all right okay now we're going to look at how to solve a system of equations even without the graph and you can still picture the graph the idea that that's that's what this is these are two systems of equate these are two equations two functions that you could graph but i don't need to see the graph to get the solution and sometimes for solutions that it might not be easy to see on a graph then you know maybe it's you know not in a nice integer solving this this is going to work each time so we're going to look at how to do this just on paper or on the board and then we'll look at the code on how to do this and set it up to be able to solve anything just change the equation so if i have these two equations one of the ways to solve this and this is some version of substitution is if we notice if this equals y and this equals y then they can equal each other then three x plus ten equals four x so we see that if that equals y and that equals y then these must equal each other three x plus ten equals four x and that's a little bit of the logic that's inherent in in all math so now we can solve these what can i do to solve for x i can subtract three x from both sides and then i get ten equals x now once i solve that x is ten well i want a point so that's my x value i need my y value and i can plug this in to either equation so i would take this and let's say i want to plug it into here so y equals four x then i could take that and y equals four times ten and that gives me y equals 40 and then that's how we would get the solution we can set these equal to each other and then solve solve usually for x and then plug that in either one of those and then get our y value now this is very similar to how this is going to work out in the code one of the things that makes uh sim the simpy library and solving this with python a little bit better is this works out nicely when they're equal to y and you know that looks but if i had equations that were not equal to y or something like that with the python code what i would do and we would do the same thing with this is the idea that i would make i would want each of these equal to zero so i would end up subtracting y here so i would get you know three x plus ten and i subtract y from both sides equals zero and that's the version i'm going to want this in when i solve it with the code and then the same thing here you know four x minus y equals zero and then with each of them set equal to zero then you will see how that that plays out using the simpy library but that's that's kind of the method that python uses to solve so one of the advantages of this is they could be in whatever form they want whatever you have on the other side of the equal sign just subtract it over and then now you have two equations equal to zero and you can solve it so you know and there's many other ways to solve systems of equations but that's kind of the couple ways i want to show you you know this this type of factoring where you can set these equations equal to each other solve for one variable and then get the other one and then we'll take a look at it now so let's take a look at the code so let's start with the simplest way to solve a system of equations now this is especially for linear equations so you want to set each equation equal to zero but as far as algebra steps go that's fine it you know it doesn't have to be simplified just as long as it equals zero so here we're going to use simpy our symbolic math library and i'm just importing everything from simpy import everything so that's the asterisk there and we're going to define x and y as symbols so we see this there we go x y symbols and now here's the equation set equal to zero so first one here and the second one here then i just defined it as first and second and here's how we get the solution so this is the lin solve is the is the formula from simpy lin solve and it takes notice the extra brackets first comma second so it takes this as essentially an array of two different equations and then the next argument comma x y in an additional parentheses so it's using these symbols so linear solve these two equations because after each set equal to zero we can set them equal to each other and use these symbols and when you run this i already ran it and we see it comes out as a finite set now again the simplest way is there we go we set these and here's the one line that puts it all together you can just change you know change these two equations and run it and you know you see your answer it's pretty clear it's a finite set x is negative one y is three supposing i want it to look a little bit nicer so still importing everything from simpy and these symbols still have the same i'm going to use the same equations first and second now here where i have this solution here that's the same line but now i know that this solution variable is going to be a finite set but there's things i can do with that so i'm going to create another variable x solution here and i'm going to take this solution dot args zero zero notice it behind the scenes it's a two-dimensional array so i want the first thing and then the y solution also a two-dimensional array solution dot args zero one so having this i can print a coordinate pair so there you all print the parentheses x solution comma y solution the closing parentheses and then when i run this there we go it will print you know negative one three in parentheses and i can do other things with that now there we go so what if i also want to see the graph now this gets tricky because we can't graph the same way that we would that we would otherwise because going through loops doesn't really work with simpy of going through numpy doesn't really work with simpy but simpy has its own plot that we can use so there we go it doesn't work with the others but it has its own so from simpy dot plotting i'm going to import plot and so this is the simpy plot and slightly different way i declare these variables here var x y here then this one is similar to what we were doing set equal to zero ready to solve that looks pretty similar to what we were just doing same with the second equation and so this part i'm still going to go through the same thing you know get the solution get the solution get the x solution the y solution and print so this is what i just this is all the same what we just did before but what the other things that we can do is now that i have these and i know that these are equations set equal to zero now simpy syntax for something set equal to zero if i want to get it ready to factor so my y value for the first equation i call it y first so in simpy we're going to define this as an equation first and then comma zero means that's that first equation and i'm just spelling it out that it was set equal to zero we kind of need that so now y first is that set equal to zero and then y1 i'm going to make this variable y1 which solves that first equation you see y first comma y so i'm going to take that here spell it out that it's set equal to zero and then do my algebra factoring i'm going to solve for y and solve for y and then store it as this variable y1 i'm going to do the same thing for the second equation so set it as an equation second the second equation is comma zero y second and then i'm going to solve it y second comma y i'm going to solve it for y so now that i have y1 and y2 i can print them because that might be interesting so it's just going to give me these so i have y equals that i will display exactly comma and then here's the variable y1 zero and y2 zero again because you know the index of the array so we have these that i can show factor but we were talking about graphing this so let's do that next but now i have i will display the solution i will display these you know y equals equations and now when i plot the solution i didn't just factor it to see that as y equals though that is really nice i actually usually like that but to plot the solution here see now i'm going to just reference x as a symbol as a symbol and then take a look at this i'm going to plot but notice nothing dot plot this is just plot within simp i plot and what am i plotting this y value y1 zero and this one y2 zero so there we go so when we factored it into y equals that helped us not just display the solution but put this into here that this is what i'm plotting these two y equals equations and then the x value notice also a little bit different the way we display x comma negative 10 to 10 to 10 i could you know make these other variables but that's going to work out just fine for us so then when we run this i see the solution i have it as y equals i have that one is y equals and then i see the graph and we see where the solution is negative one three there we go so we can do this for you know any other ones here there we go let's just change it up maybe make it negative 2x you know i don't know minus two and maybe this one make this like two times x x and i don't know like plus eight change it up a little bit and so we have our first ones and we'll solve it print out the solution factor it show the y equals equations and then graph it and now we have this new one two six is the solution here are my two equations y equals two times x plus two and y equals x plus four so we see these two and how do we know which one the two times x has a steeper slope so that's got to be this one that's the bottom line and then x plus four the slope is only one so that's got to be this top line and we see that they intersect here at two six all right so we see how we can solve and we can solve and graph there we go and this works for linear equations for equations beyond linear we'll cross that bridge when we get to it which is going to be in the upcoming sections now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use that use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so here again is where we're going to put together all the newer functions you've been learning into your calculator so that you'll have these as a reference and remember we already have where you should already have proportions set up so the text to show the setup and then the code to enter it in and solve your proportion and remember we made this a heading so we can minimize that there we go and we already did this converting decimals to fractions and percent so again all the code there and that's also section heading solve for x so each week you know you're learning and we're building and then we're going to take like the final product all of it put together so here's one if you just have a an equation you want to solve for x pretty straightforward we'll have that there and factoring so we can solve or we could factor you know factor out a common term or something like that we have we have that and each of these you don't need to use our interface because you just have this the solving solving for x we did put a user interface in there it's going to prompt for the input and then you see that the equation set equal to zero whereas the factoring one it's just this equation that you know there to put put it there and then simpy dot factor okay so that's also a section heading then recently we were doing things like solving for a variable so not just set solve for x but even if it's not a definite number to actually rewrite it you know like y equals a over b or something like that where you don't even have numbers this will do that for you and we defined a lot of our basic variables that we might use it's not going to be an error to put them in there and not use them but you could always if you change what variables you use you can always edit that part and then whatever it is whether it be the involving numbers or a bunch of letters and variables you know left and right side of the equal sign and then we have this then we're just going to define the variable so that way you can pick what variable you want to solve for set it as an equation remember we did this and then we're going to solve and this loop runs through all possibilities for s in solve for solution so we have that that we can solve for a variable like again it's already heading and we have that therefore in the table of contents so we're going to add the other things we've been doing slope intercept from two points because this in itself is a very common thing to need to do so we're going to define the two points there we go x you know x and y and then using just our slope formula solve for b we're going to get m and b and having those two we're going to print out the equation and then we're going to use that for the graph and you can keep this at these numbers if you want you know you could always change this x min negative 10 and we could leave the others as is but you could always change them to 10 in every direction if you wanted to and having those we have have these you know for the graph and the setup the details could always add other details or change these and you see for things that we might use we might want to see the tick marks so we have them there so you don't have to really think about you know the exact syntax hopefully the more you do this you remember it but it's just there and it's commented out so you can use it if you want and then that way here we just plot the function as a red line so even if you end up changing some of these you have a lot of things that are there by default that if you really entered in two points you could solve whatever you wanted to solve and graph it so we have that here let's make that a section heading then we can double click and remember it's this hashtag because it's in the because it's in the text not in the code now that became a section heading and shows up in the table of contents so we have that now the section heading goes all the way down to the next heading or the bottom so that one we can minimize now this one if we minimize it that's all the rest of the document here so besides that i might just want to graph something and remember in you know we use this the other code as you're building it remember the slope intercept stuff came from week five and then other ways to customize the graph came from some of the extra things we're doing in week four in week four where we have you know again all the different things we want to do with the graph the labels as well as setting the tick marks and this one you know we even customized the labels down here you know and added a remember we customized it and added this whole legend here but in copying this for yours we're going to put all these as well as the zoom that we were doing all in one thing so this function then does all the graphing and i'm going to skip down here for a second the slider remember that interactive plot we're going to run this function f and the only slider we're going to have is to zoom and that's going to be our multiplier from one to i just picked a hundred that's good and then taking that so whatever that multiplier is that will define what we have for our x min and x max and then once we have those we can define the points for our np dot linspace to graph and there we go and i just put this you could do the same just two lines as by default you know maybe you want to have two lines and then you you know you want to see where they where they intersect so this graphs two different lines and notice does not have to be a linear equation as long as you're using python syntax whatever line you want to graph and we i commented this out but again you could have it if you want to fill between shade above or below and i just happen to have this one fill between same x values so the y value goes from y1 up to y max so that would shade above and it would make it green and the next one fill between same x values from y2 down to y min and make it blue so that would shade below so again you could have these here in case you need them we're making these default notebooks that you can use and you say oh okay i do want to shade above or below uncomment it and then we have the labels general labels you can change now for this one i kept this the tick marks in there and the grid and notice because a lot of this is based on the zoom so then how many ticks do i want and what i did is i got the difference the how you know from x max to x min divided by 20 i tickered with this and that seemed to be a good number to display nicely so we're going to get that divide by 20 and then round it and then cast it as an integer so the number of ticks has to be an integer so then that was then that way no matter what the zoom is you'll see that we can adjust the tick marks and show the grid so this will give us a few things that we can graph you know this default and then let's see given these equations that we have in here a lot of times i like to keep an equation in there rather than just like make that line blank so if you run the code it works and you see something something so here we have this graph and we see the default zoom goes right to the middle but i could move this back down and you see everything adjusts the tick marks adjust the graph zooms in and then you can see you know or we could zoom out out and we see so yeah pretty good i like kind of for this particular graph i like it zoomed in and then you can see you know about where they where they cross so sometimes you just might want to graph something and there there we have that and there we go we could put more directions and you could have the whole every all the directions don't have to be the heading you could have that and you could put an html break right after that if you wanted to and then more words underneath that would not become a part of the heading but for this we can just put the heading here here we go i remember there's really no entering we just put it on a little line you just click somewhere else and now that's also a part of the table of contents so we have that and then solve and graph a system and this is nice it brings it all together solving it and graphing it so here you can put in as long as you have python syntax whatever you have there is your first and second equation and i even have an extra one here just to be able to uncomment and you can see this will even work if you have a square root just to have different ones to show you and we've used the linsolve before to solve uh using simpy the linsolve to solve uh two equations and this is actually another one non-linsolve i like this one because it can be lit i just put the comment in there it can be linear or non-linear it works out so just because you have non-linsolve does not mean that you have to have you know something different if one of your functions is linear but there we go the comments just so you know here's where you enter in and then you already have the code that you would have copied this one would have been from eight uh yeah from from uh the recent week to solve and graph you can just copy these and then tinker with them a little bit you know as we went through and built up to these important uh blocks of code you know take the last one that brings it all together and then over here you know that's what you're doing you're building your your library here so solving graph the system of equations and then this will work solve and graph pretty much anything and i just want to show you some of these so even if it's non-linear and you see it'll give you the solution x y this one happens to have two solutions notice because we had the uh the loop the four loop here to account for multiple solutions so it'll have the two solutions then also show the two y equals equations and then graph them so that's pretty complete that's a good good one you want to have this is this type of thing in your toolbox double click and let's make this one a heading there we go so we have that and i've added one more thing here and we could still make this a heading notice this code isn't complete but i put one thing in here they give you a reference point so you certainly you would recognize that that's import so that would go first and then you see this you would also it would be something you already graphed so the plt would already work but notice you have this dot save fig and you're going to give it a name dot p l t notice you have this dot save fig and you're going to give it a name dot png that's a good file type to use notice that'll come before the plt dot show and that actually works if you put it after i've tried this if you put this after it actually will save something but it'll be a blank graph and what's interesting is this download can come after so that's okay i mean you could put it first that'd be fine too but it can come after because it doesn't interfere with what this shows and this is a way to download this to your computer or your phone there we go save the output because sometimes you might have have something that you wanted to save so therefore you take this and you would put if you wanted to up here you import that and then and then definitely you you know you would just do save fig and files download so there we go and we have this now we have all of this and one of the things you can do is in the view you can collapse all the sections all right and now you have all these in your table of contents and you can just jump to them if you need to there you go you have all the sections collapsed and oh do i need to solve for x do i need to solve for variable you know i i like i like shorter headings so i might and down save graph and download it there you go because that's what it does is it downloads an image so already we have so much of the core algebra that you're able to do and you and you can write the code for it and now you have this at the ready so one of the next things we're going to do is get to quadratics and more complicated graphs we kind of hinted at that last one you know you might if if you haven't seen a lot of these and you say oh wow okay now this graph has a curve now it's getting interesting so we'll get into quadratics parabolas you know where all the graphs do have a curve to them and things beyond that so we'll add more to this all right but well well on your way to being able being able to solve a lot of algebra problems in python so when working with word problems not just here's a math formula solve it work with you know word problems or some people call them story problems that's when a lot of times people have trouble translating that into a math equation that we can solve so what i want to do is help you with some keywords that you can find in the word problems in the sentences that'll tell you what math operation to use and this is not all of them but this is a lot of the main ones and you know you get the trend with this these are the things you're looking for and then after we look at these keywords we'll go we'll go through a bunch of examples in the code and how to use these you know translating sentences into math equations but let's take a look at these keywords so how do i know if i'm going to add well some of the words are going to be if i just actually see plus some number plus another number more so if i have something and then i got more how much do i have now you know the amount of money i had increased it might even just be and you know i have you know these cards and those cards how many cards do i have received because a lot of times that's something added to what we have up something goes up and a lot of times calculating elevation up we're adding it might even just come up and say added to sum also and sum means the total when i add up so we might see some of we might see these you know the sum of three and four means i'm going to do three plus four so these are some of the ones if you're looking and you see these then you know you're adding okay and a lot of this it's not so exact that you could write a program to find a number find one of these keywords and then automatically translate it to a math equation so you have to use a little bit of your human intuition there but it it's very much in that direction see these numbers what which one of these words are around there and that's going to give you an indication of the path operation so let's take a look at subtraction so subtract yeah it might just say minus less anytime i have less than i'm subtracting or it decreased the amount of money in my bank decreased so i subtract gave because a lot of times things if i receive something that it becomes added to what i have or if i gave then it becomes subtracted from what i have down and that also goes again with looking at elevation it might even just come out and say subtracted and then anytime it says the word difference or i know i want to find the difference between two numbers that's subtraction you know we just find the difference and you know that might be a negative difference might be a positive might be absolute value but if i if it says difference or if i want to find the difference then i'm going to subtract all right so with multiply so how do i know that i'm multiplying obviously things are increasing like there are you know we want to look for that general trend things are increasing and just right away if you have that since things are increasing you know it's multiplying or adding so how do i know that it would be multiplying by just the word by because if i'm calculating an area of something three by five and then i've won't you know also then just seeing the word area but three by five means the area would be three times five of so just the word of is going to be multiply a percent of something you have the percent and then you multiply times whatever that something is factor because two things you multiply together are factors times so yeah three times four you know it might just come out and say times and even if it doesn't have these it might just give dimensions and say what's the area and anytime i'm calculating the area of something i'm multiplying so there we go again not this is not all the numbers that lead to multiply but this is a lot of the main one all right so divide out of so notice of would be multiplying but out of is divide so you know four out of five that would be a fraction four divided by five per same actually per pretty much means out of but that's another way to think about dividing of miles per hour i would divide miles divided by hours or kilometers per hour kilometers divided by hours quotient we don't see this word that often but that quotient means that i'm quotient the word means that i'm dividing and actually that's the answer when i divide any rate and as i was saying you know you know kilometers per hour or something like that but anytime i have a rate it's going to be some sort of dividing something divided by something else usually divided by something related to time but it's not always so anytime i have a rate i know i'm dividing something and again it might just come out and say divided by so you know some of the key words here now i put the word each here because that actually could go for multiply or divide it's the sense of it you know if i have if i have 20 students in the class and i want to give them two pencils each how many pencils do i need so then that's multiplying because i have to do 20 times two but if i have if i know how many pencils i have and then you know i know and then i have 20 students and i you know how many can i how many can each of them get you know if i already know that i have 20 and then i have 20 students how many can each of them get i'm dividing so each can go either way we have to get the sense of it and dividing like subtraction if i get the sense that it's getting to be a smaller number then i know it's dividing or subtracting you know and then we we can look further you know what's the sense of it am i is it something you know each you know i'm dividing it out among different things or is it just a subtraction okay so these are some of the main things and the one that carries over a lot is or some version of is are was but is translates to equals so that's where we get the equal sign coming into our equation and so if i have these then i can translate you know this is was will be something like that becomes the equal sign so looking at these keywords you know we get the numbers from the from the situation as well as these keywords and we can put together an equation and so i wanted to give you these keywords and then in the code what we're going to do is we're going to look at a lot of you know some sentences and translating them into math equations and then of course solving them that's what we want to do we want to be able to translate this you know you're not always in life going to have like here's the math problem it's going to be you know some words and we have to translate that to a math problem so let's take a look at how to do this let's let's apply these translate some sentences into math problems all right so let's take a look at the code so now let's put some of this into practice some of the math we've been talking about with the linear equations slope intercept especially and some of the python developing equations finding slope graphing all that let's put all this together and use that to solve some problems here and first let's look at how we can see that y equals mx plus b pattern for a linear equation show up in slightly different ways you know sometimes we just change out the letters a little bit but be able to recognize that pattern so if we take a look at number one and this all comes from the textbook the one that i have listed as textbook two algebra and trig so you know there we go page 304 you can find it find these because we're just going to pick a few of these and i want to highlight you know what we can do with these so if we take a look terry is skiing down a steep hill terry's elevation e of t that's how i'd write that that's the function um instead of just y equals we'll call it e of t elevation as a function of time terry's elevation in feet after t seconds is given by this so e of t equals 3000 minus 70 t and we see then you know instead of x we're using t because it's time and we have 3000 minus 70 t and then our y value is e of t that's the function and so we see the slow the intercept come first that's where we begin she terry begins at 3000 feet up and then goes down the slope at 70 feet per second so we see that that is the slope the slope of our equation on the slope and negative because that elevation is going down there we go so we can see the slope we can see where terry begins 3000 feet up um and there we go just uh finding that slope we just look at it and we take a look at number two now we have jessica walking home from a friend's house after two minutes she's 1.4 miles from home 12 minutes after leaving she's 0.9 miles from home what's her rate in miles per hour miles per hour well right here we have distances in miles but the times in minutes so if the question asks for miles per hour we definitely see also that we have two points we have a time and a distance and then another time and distance so you know x will be time y will be distance and having these two points we can go to our calculator now hopefully this lines up with something that you've already created you know remember we might have called it like your calculator and then hopefully you know then you would have created the table of contents for the different things that we want to be able to do and we can jump to here slope intercept equation from two points because even though the that question didn't ask for the full equation and everything we're going to do more but the first thing it's going to do is find the slope for us and hopefully you know that's it you know we have these formulas you made these now we can make use of it so you would have had all this and then we would just change x1 y1 so the y value is 1.4 but that x value it's two minutes and we have to remember so i already put this in here it's two minutes and there's 60 minutes in an hour so it's two out of 60 you could reduce this if you want but you don't even have to python will take care of that in the other in between steps and the y value 1.4 miles so the second x value 12 minutes so same thing 12 minutes we want an hour so it's 12 out of 60 again that reduces but you don't you don't actually have to and then 0.9 so having all this you can just put in these four values here calculate the slope intercept we'll print that out so you see the equation and then we'll also graph it i mean we're going beyond what the question is but this will give you an idea of some things you can do you already have this and all we needed to do is recognize what these values were put them in here and then we run it all right so this i absolutely would take this slope as three so sometimes just the way python calculates things it might be this 0.9999 it's three and if you really wanted to seeing this you know you could always go back and put a round function in in your code you know round it same with this you could always round it to two decimal place to one decimal place which would be 1.5 but either way we see that remember our first point was two minutes after she left so at time zero at two minutes she was 1.4 miles from home but at time zero she's that little bit more 1.49 or 1.5 it might round so we get our values here and you know again you could put a round function in there but i'm not worried about that right now and also python it gives us this warning but it's still ran occasionally that happens just the the way it calculates some things some things you know we get a warning you know some value maybe not even related to what we were working on gives us this warning but it's still ran it still gave us all this and then we also have this graphed now if we have you know the x values or the y values so so this is her time from home so this y value notice it seems like this graph is completely irrelevant because the y value only goes down to net 9.6 we want it down to zero and then we have negative time values what you know what's that all about so remember mathematically a lot you know all these things already exist these values exist you know we make this equation here negative 3x plus 1.5 but that whole equation exists so we can actually change the graph and one of the things we have you know later on in this document is you know we can graph you can always graph and zoom but we can just change the graph here and our x minimum if x is time we can just make that zero because negative time you know she was still at her friend's house so that won't affect the the walking and the x maximum i mean we can really zoom in now once we figured out that she was going three miles an hour and she only had half a mile to go like we can make our x value really small i don't know i'll maybe i'll just reduce it to five for this one and the y minimum um is zero and the y maximum i don't even need that to be 10 i can even make it i'll make it five but we don't even need to that much we can really zoom in on this because it's a relatively short distance all right so now when we have this now we have graph we can zoom in on and you know this is the only part we needed so we could look at this that you know about one and a half miles away and so therefore you know she's walking about three miles an hour it takes her about a half hour to get home and there we go we see you know the rate you know the slope the whole equation we see the graph and then we can graph the the trip home we could also always you know change these you know if you really needed to explain this you know to someone else you could always put you know x values you could change that to time y value can make it distance from home so there we go so we have these calculators that you know we're talking about it here i'm talking about it here a lot now but if you had this at the ready you might even just you might might even just you know see this oh i see my two values plug them in click run and you have your answer you know move on in a few seconds here so some things we can do here notice number three very similar and maybe we'll do number three you know a lot quicker a boat is a hundred miles from the marina sailing directly at it at 10 miles per hour so now we already know that equation because because it's a hundred miles away so that's where we begin at 10 miles or an hour and if we want the distance from the marina then it's a negative 10 100 minus 10 x so we could always go here like that's the equation 100 minus 10 x and we could always go to something else and we could graph that and see you know just the trend how long does how long will it take for the boat to to get to the marina there you go 10 miles an hour you might even be able to do this in your head that it's 10 10 hours to get there and that's the thing we have the setup for when the numbers get more difficult but sometimes you can just calculate it yourself all right and we take a look at some of these and remember a linear function we'll get into the other functions quadratics and things beyond that but a linear function has no exponents so there we go no exponents so we see six is linear seven is linear eight is not because we have x squared nine is linear ten is not we have x squared nine is linear ten is not we have x squared eleven we have y squared so that's actually not even a function like the ones we've been doing so that's another story 12 yep actually not a function like the ones we've been doing and certainly not linear 13 if i had x in the denominator then that would not be linear but with just a five in the denominator we're okay so there we go and increasing or decreasing we would just look at the slope if the slope's positive it's increasing if the slope is negative it's decreasing and remember the slope is that x coefficient so slopes four it's increasing 15 slope is five it's decrease it's increasing and 16 the slope is negative two so it's decreasing 17 it's negative three it's decreasing so we see that and just like we were doing with these other problems you just like number 24 there you go you could just plug these in two four four ten there you go run it and have your equation and see the equation and see the graph so a lot of these you know once you have the code down you know it becomes a lot easier there you go same thing a line if we have two points then yeah we put this in there all right now let's take a look at 37 so these two lines now we get into the system of equations are they parallel perpendicular or neither well one of the things we can do then is we can look at one of our other notebook sections and we can graph these two and see so let's take a look at this 4x minus 7y equals 10 so let's take a look at this and you would have this you know how about this graph lines and zoom in or out remember you would have made something like that too and we defined our function so that we can zoom in or out and we have two lines so line one i could just graph this now also so one of the things we can do to graph these if you wanted to is put it and this would be something that you would do you have to put each of these in the y equals version because they're not in y equals and that's how we have it set up to graph you see it's it's going to be y equals and they are going to be functions so we have this well let's go to another one solve and graph a system because this one does not have to be equal to y in fact we just make it equal to zero so i actually already put this in here four four times x minus seven times y and the only thing we need to do is make it equal to zero so that equals ten subtract ten from both sides you see much quicker much easier to do and then the second one seven x plus four y equals one just subtract one from both sides and that's what we have here so it underlines these but the moments we run it'll be fine so that works out really well because as long as you have to set equal to zero just anything on the other side subtract it over and remember you would have already made this hopefully and you know your first equation your second set equal to zero and remember we're solve then we solve it and we're going to get that solution and then we're going to also convert it to y equals here and then graph it print the y equals version and when we run it we see we have the solution and it's not even you know this is again more than the question asked but if we already had the code you know we can do this the solution and yes these are two very weird fractions that you know it would be a little bit tedious if you were calculating this by hand we get the solution and so we also see the graph these are not parallel or perpendicular and we see where they intersect at this value negative 66 over 65 so all you know almost negative one little bit off and then a fraction there and then we see the y equals versions four times x over seven minus ten over seven so we see this one has a slope of four over seven and this one has a slope of negative seven over four oh then they would be perpendicular despite what this graph shows so let's try to change this because the slope here is four over seven you see even though we're multiplying by x that coefficient is four over seven and then over here it's negative seven over four and that's what makes them perpendicular the negative reciprocal four over seven negative seven over four that if you multiplied them together they would be negative one so if we change the scale on this we can probably it'll probably look more perpendicular and so this just naturally scales it this way all right so we have but that's why because in this same window the y value goes up to 15 so the you know it perpendicular this intersection would be at a right angle and the you know we just can't see that right angle because of the scale of the graph all right so that work i would work for any of these now you know 38 yeah pretty easy i would just add y to both sides you know subtract 12 on the first one and they're equal set equal to zero and we can use that same thing same with 39 maybe we'll do another one here here so we get yeah if we have this let's just do yeah we'll do one more here three y plus x equals 12 so if we go back to this then i'll make the first equation then we'll have three times y y plus x minus 12 because that i would have to equal zero three will remember python syntax you have to put the three times y whereas algebra you won't see that multiplication symbol in there so three three y plus x minus 12 equals zero and then on the second one eight x plus one plus y y so on the second equation we'll have eight x eight x eight times x plus one plus y and see i don't even for these are as bad but you know for other ones you don't have to worry about factoring it as long as it's set equal to zero we will get the solution and then we're going to show the y equals version and then graph it so yep these do have a solution where a point where they intersect and notice they are not perpendicular because the slope is negative one third you know one x over three and this one the slope is negative eight so a steep slope at negative eight and also a negative slope but not as steep so they will meet at this point there we go so pretty cool solving a more complicated system of equations solving it factoring it graphing it remember if you have you know you don't build these calculators for yourself then you have it you can answer all these questions and some other things and so we see you know the similar things lines passing through and in any of these you could build for yourself you know a notebook section of code that will do this for two for two point uh two lines or you could actually go back to the one you had and you could use the slope intercept equation for the one line and then write it in later and then you could use the slope intercept equation again for the second line and then write it in so that's what we have here like this one you know you have this slope intercept and you always could then take it and you know copy that and write it in here as you know line one go back and do the other one copy it as line two so that you know that that's one of the things you could do if you wanted to you know take take something like that and have it actually do two instead of one but nonetheless you know right now as i have it it was it was two separate things you can get the equation and you could if you wanted to copy it into the next one so all these yep same thing two points you get the equation two points get the equation and there we go just looking at that equation you know parallel they'd have the same slope perpendicular then you could multiply the slopes together to get negative one and neither is anything else as long as they have different slopes so we see all these different things you can calculate and i'll leave this to you if you want to you know go through and practice some of these see some of these you don't have to have the full equation or you don't have to have the the note jupiter notebook or co-lab because if you remember the pattern that slope intercept equation here what's the y-intercept it's five you can see it and then for this particular one you can actually count you know oh wow look at that you know we go down five over four so the slope would be negative five over four so it would be y equals negative y equals negative five over four x plus five or if you wanted to you could just take these two points and plug you know go back to the notebook plug them in and see it generate the equation but see that that'll work for any of these you know having this you can count the slope like in 58 so b is one and then from that to the next nice point it looks like you go up two and then over three there you go there's your slope so you can you know work on these so some of these again any of these you want to see a graph we could just plug any of these into that other notebook section where you see the graph the graph all right sketch a line good and again you can practice all these if you want the tables so really just remember x and then whatever you want to call it g of x that's the y value and so if i want the equation then what we want is we can just take the first two points and get the equation so that's you know x is zero y is five and the next one x is five y is negative 10 and we can get that equation but then also if you wanted to you get the next two points and see if it's the same slope so that's how we would determine if it's linear i mean we could always just plot any of these points and and see what it comes out as so that's another way we could just plot these points as their own array and see if it looks like they line up you know that's another interesting way to do it and there we go so so yeah let me let me just show you how to do that on on one of these and so if the x values are 0 5 10 and 15 now what you can do is in in one of these where you're going to graph so if we have yeah here and we'll even keep the zoom in so one of these where you're going to graph we we have all this for the zoom but what you can do is you could make an array of the x values all right so we could get x equals and make it you know 0 comma 5 comma and you see 0 5 10 15 and we can just make that the array 10 15 and then and then you could now we could just comment out all of this because we don't need these and and take this and this first one we could put you know comment out this and we could have y1 and we could have y1 and put your y values 5 negative 10 negative 25 negative 40 so there we go 5 negative 10 negative 25 negative 40 so remember that you know that that numpy essentially does give us an array of values and we could just put our own array and if you wanted to in here we could also then put you know make them make them dots i'll say ro so we'll make them red dots for the points so we could have the x array have the y array and then that's what we're plotting there we go we just commented all these out and so we have this looks to be that they're in line and we can change the scale i like to keep you know yep it definitely looks like they're in a line so we could you know there we go we could say that yep that's that would be a line and you know that works that is linear so some some of these you might just notice okay does the slope change in in that table but also i wanted to show you for this or for this example i'm going to show you in in that table but also i wanted to show you for this or for you know this might seem like a lot to do for that little question but also just showing you what you can do if you have you know more complicated sets because all of these that you know this this is designed to be practice and just a few values just to show you but remember this is this is going to lead you toward data science if you want to continue following this path and instead of having like four values you might have like you know four thousand and so we want to know hey how can we do this we'll have other ways rather than having to you know write our own array rather to grab those values if there was like a thousand of them and then store that as an array and same with the other y values but then you know can i do this can i just take this and plot all these points and see what it looks like now these are the things we want to be able to do so you know there we go some some things you know and and it answers a very simple question is it linear because otherwise you know they might get some of these that the plot's all over the place and i could not say that they're they all line up nicely so that's it you know here's some of these you know missing values of a linear function and remember you can graph and actually introduce a table of values too if you wanted to so you know those are some other things you can do so we have these here we go and some of these we would have to put the slope formula so remember the slope formula is you know without looking at the code you know find the equation of the line goes to the points here without looking at the code the y values b plus one and then the other y values b so when we subtract that it went up one you see the y value went from b to b plus one but then look at this the x value is a and that didn't change so a minus a is zero so we have it's actually not a function but it would just be an x value x equals a so these are some of the things just you know plugging in these values for uh in the slope and you could always do some of this with you could define all of these values if you look at the the other one that we were doing here solve and graph now the you might have to comment out the graph probably wouldn't do too well but taking these and you know you you know you if you define more variables you could still take these and define these values again the solution might not be uh really possible but you could take those values and then you could actually solve and this solves it for zero but you could actually solve it for you know solve it for y or whatever value you want so simpy will do that for you so that's it you know you could have you could have a make another section in your notebook that just does all that interesting factoring all right so there we go and so we have some other ones here so so here's one um now this we have at noon the barista knows she has twenty dollars in her tip jar and if she makes an average of fifty cents more from each customer so remember that's an average so you might have customers tipping more some tipping less and then it averages out so these are good estimates because we would right away see the equation we begin with 20 and then it's an additional because we know she's getting something more 50 cents from each customer so it's 20 plus 0.5 x so we see that equation then we you know right away we have that 20 plus 0.5 x and we can do something with that we could like graph it we could find values this particular question we just says n more so it would be 20 plus 0.5 n you know we just change that variable and then at any point she can plug in a number for n figure out you know how many tips she has all right and this 115 these are some of the things that you know you can calculate a gym membership with two personal training sessions and a gym membership with two personal training sessions cost 125 while gym membership with five personal training sessions cost 260 what's the cost per session so we take it as the membership itself is just one thing and then you could have like you know each of these so really we have our x value would be how many training sessions and then the y value would be the cost and so that's it even though you know we don't it's not asking us to graph we absolutely could go back to this and two sessions was 125 and then five sessions was 260 so we could go back to this and back to the earlier one you know slope intercept from two points and we could say you know there we go two sessions cost 125 you know how many sessions and then dollar amount and then we have five sessions would be then 260 and oh now this we need to change this the x minimum now that's probably fine for five but let's take a look at this and let's see what we can do here so let's go up to 10 y minimum zero is probably fine but the y maximum and there we go maybe we'll make it like you know 500 we're going to go beyond that but that's fine and when we see the graph so we can see that we're going to go beyond that we're going to go beyond that we're going to go beyond that but that's fine and when we see the graph so we see the equation 45 x plus 35 so the membership itself must be 35 dollars and each session must be 45 dollars and so we see this graph then you know there we go you know and we see where we see the cost 45 you know almost halfway there and then we see the increase okay if somebody wants to plan you know what it's going to cost how many training sessions do i want maybe this is in a month the person wants like two in a week so it might be about eight in a month and can calculate oh there we go eight training sessions that'd be four hundred dollars or you know do i want to just try to just pay the 35 dollars and not get any training sessions and you know there we go then it's somewhere around here at the zero value and that's what we want we want to you know use these to be able to calculate some different things you know the cost like 116 here so the linear relation clothing business finds there's a linear relationship between the number of shirts it can sell and the price price p that it can charge for sure so there you go selling and shirts if the price is p and this is you know things that people want to find out because then that helps people figure out what price you know they definitely start out like can't you know go below a certain price because i have to make money i can't lose money but then beyond that we see oh wow this is shirts all different prices are possible so somebody says that finds this historical data so finding data from somewhere else some other people selling shirts oh okay i can sell a thousand shirts if the price is thirty dollars but three thousand shirts if the price is twenty two dollars so there we go again that classic y equals mx plus b but we just changed the letters change the letters p of n you know the price based on n shirt n shirts is mn plus b so there we go we can we can look at this you know n shirts now something like this i might take that the price is the independent variable because that affects how many shirts you can buy and so we might you know do something like that and then we'll get into in uh later units here we'll get into other things where we can then based on that price you know given this we can find that that you know that equation for price and then based on that price we can take it a step further and say what would be my profit because just as an example here so a thousand shirts at thirty dollars so it'd be thirty thousand dollars so they sold a thousand shirts thirty dollars each but three thousand shirts at twenty two so twenty two times three thousand is forty four uh uh sixty six thousand dollars so just lowering that not just you know selling more shirts but the price that it had to lower or reduce to twenty two dollars not that much different and so it sells three thousand shirts so instead of thirty thousand dollars sixty six thousand dollars look at that almost uh more than twice the profit for a little bit less and some people who don't look at the math of this would say that you know what is is the you know reducing it eight dollars is that going to double my profit actually it does or at least the revenue we don't know the cost of making the shirts but it more than doubles the revenue just lowering that a little bit because it reached so many people and so that's what people are looking at you know and in again in further units we'll look at the math behind you know how to how to get this how to find that maximum profit value maximum revenue value and you know what you know what are we looking at here how can we find that you know ideal shirt price so there we go there we go all these others same situation linear equation we're trying to maximize things if we look at number 18 a farmer finds a linear relationship between the number of bean stalks she uh she plants and then the yield that each plant produces so 30 stalks each plant yield you know how many per per acre so 30 stocks each plant yields 30 ounces of beans but then 34 stalks reduces its 28 ounces of beans you know they're all competing for some of the same resources so we can definitely get that you know they're all competing for some of the same resources so we can definitely get that linear equation and then we can try to find so what would be the maximum you know how what would maximize the bean yield so you know it'd be really interesting so then we get this um um yes so notice this uh and the yield would be 30 ounces that many beans times 34 oh no sorry 30 stocks times 30 ounces see then 30 times 30 so that's 900 or then we have 34 times 28 and i'm not going to do that in my head but we can see some different values and then we'll look at these in some of the other business applications later on so some more things if we if the town population and like number 120 drawing linearly we can write an equation for that you know here's another one where we often do this all the time converting temperature from celsius to fahrenheit and we have these two values zero degrees celsius is 32 degrees fahrenheit so then we know um 100 degrees celsius is when water boils and the corresponding temp is 212 fahrenheit so what you can do is we could just take these now we could also use this to make another function but we could also take this you know slope intercept from an equation equation from two points and there we go still better sub equation from two points and we can say all right so we have zero and then 32 and celsius would be 100 and fahrenheit would be 212 here we go and see the see the graph now the graph in this case okay and i'm not even worried about changing the values because the main thing we wanted was this equation here 1.8 x minus 32 some people like that 1.8 is a fraction that's nine over five so there we go that's and remember then the x value was celsius the x value was celsius so that's how we can convert celsius to fahrenheit times 1.8 plus 32 and so if we look at the increase you know 1.8 is almost two so you know each celsius degree increases almost two degrees fahrenheit increase so we can see that change so if we take a look at this you know we you could always you can always make this that you know make another function for yourself that you could you know you could just have like you could just have celsius to fahrenheit fahrenheit to celsius you know that make another section add it you know you know put a heading to it because remember as soon as you have the heading you know not a comment because we're not in the code but if it's in there then it becomes a heading and it'll be in the table of contents so you can always make some of these things for yourself and you know that's why i want to give you some of these practice problems you know if some of these are relevant or if you want to combine some of the things you know you have room to explore and do some different things so there we go and then once you have that equation you can find you know there we go that function of 28 degrees what's that become in celsius or fahrenheit or negative 40 uh that's a good one because negative 40 celsius is negative 40 fahrenheit so the one time where they actually agree it's got to be really cold but when it's that cold they agree and anybody not even having a thermometer would probably agree too yes it's cold so these are some of the things applying some of some of these and hopefully this is you know find this useful some some ways you can interpret some of the word problems and use some of the notebooks that you've been working on to solve problems answer questions and yeah you can continue you know add more to what you have you know make make it your calculator anytime you have different formulas they say oh this this might be useful make a function pick a formula another notebook section all right ready to go on to the next thing now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here for these extra problems we're going to look at just ways to set up some formulas you know if you have different situations word problems how can we decode these put them into math terms and then use python to solve them so just here's some examples and all these come from the pages in the first textbook you have the link so let's look at number 10 on average this happens to be full-time canadians work 39.5 hours per week so if the typical adult requires eight hours of sleep per day what's the percentage of hours in a single week left over for personal activities so we need a few things here 30 so we need the number of hours in a week and even just going through your python colab notebook we have all these different things that you can do i'm going to click on solve and graph which we're not doing yet but in here you can just put a the blank you know line of code here and even in the print statement you can do a lot of math so first of all we can have the number of hours per week and that would be 24 hours times seven days and then if we want to look at the number of hours that canadians work we're going to subtract 39.5 from that and python knows the word of operation so i can just put in here i like the spacing but you really don't need it 39.5 so there we go uh 24 hours a day times seven days a week minus 39.5 and then we actually can also subtract eight hours a day eight times seven times seven so we have how many total hours in the week and then minus the work hours and then minus the sleep hours again all this in in python shift enter and we will have 72.5 hours so there we go 72.5 hours is you know and it works out look at look at that you know work sleep still have plenty of time to go out and do things and we can do all this just know knowing what we need to do each step you can break this up into different steps and put variables but this is just one way to do this all right and let's take a look at another one that number 14 housing starts in winnipeg for the first half of 20 2009 we're down 46.733 percent we'll talk about converting that in a second from 2008 when 1500 new homes were started so from 2008 to 2009 if it was the same amount it would be that times one or times 100 which would be times 1.00 so if it didn't change it would be that times one but then since it went down we want to think one minus that rate so it's not the 100 percent it's the 100 minus this 46.733 and then the original was in 2008 it was 1500 new homes so so we can just go right back to this and we have 1500 new homes times one minus that 46.733 as a decimal is going to be 0.46733 and you see that we have that that decimal so one or you know 100 i mean it's not going to mess up the code if i put 0.00 we don't need to but so you know that's 100 so if it was that 1500 times one that would be would not change year to year and since it went down it's times one minus this rate you know we'll just overwrite this and these are number of homes so we're going to round it down and we're going to say it's 799 you know that 0.005 is you know i don't know that's what five thousandths you know i don't know they put a few boards there or something on the lot said i started but there we go we're going to call it 799 and that's how we get this times you know one minus the rate since it went down and in later weeks we're going to talk a lot more about percent increase and decrease so this is not the only time you're going to see this and in that case we're going to skip some of these other percent increase or decrease but on page 73 i want to talk about this percent change so if 999 changed to 1049 so the amount of change we would just subtract 1049 minus 999 and we see you know we can do that you can do that in your head it's an even 50 cents but then the percent changes we take that difference over the original number so if it started at 999 that's the that's the difference so that's the original number and again we can look at percent change so that 50 cents 0.50 divided by that original number 9.99 so that's we get that difference divided by the original number and as a percent we're going to we're going to multiply it by 100 because it's the first two digits and even if I were to round it the next number is a zero so it's really a five percent change there we go and if you really want it to sometimes people like to put that into the formula times 100 and yeah there we go there we go as a percent I mean if it's just for your own calculations you don't have to make it fancier if you're doing this to explain you know costs and everything in some sort of business proposal yeah it's nice to have the extra bit you know have it display nicely and people can see oh this is exactly what you're talking about for your own calculations you can put it all in the print statement and you know see see the output and there we go so if we have 1999 lowered by 10 percent so we're looking at these keywords lowered by and if it's a percent we need that formula one minus the rate again might be new to think about it this way and we're going to talk a lot more about it in later weeks but 1999 lowered by 10 percent so we're not decreasing by an amount so we're not subtracting its times one minus three and I can even you know convert this as I'll just put this here one minus 10 remember 0.10 so I put that in there with the extra zeros but you can see that that's where we get this one minus three if it didn't change it would be that number times 100 percent or times one but it's times one minus three and then that's the new number there we go and this did not have any practical connection it was just what's the number if it's a dollar amount then I'll take it to two decimal places it's 17.99 so that'd be something like you know the the shirt cost 1999 and it was on 10 off so you end up paying 17.99 and knowing how to do these things you know you have calculator so you can do this you know right there on your phone because you can have this app you can set up different things for percent increase and decrease and you know you're in the store oh what would the actual price be and at that point is it worth it there we go we go and here we have this what about when increased by 40 is 3500 now for this before I even get to what we're going to calculate I'm going to put a couple comments here because I don't want the code I just want to show you the math of this if I have some amount which I'm going to call x increased by 40 percent so if it increased then it's times one plus the rate and then that would equal that new amount so you know the the beginning amount or you know x or we can call it the original amount times one plus the rate equals the new amount and I just put this in a comment we're just looking at this formula and so if I have this then the question is what amount number six here what amount when increased by 40 percent is 3500 so that would be x times and when it's one plus three that makes it really easy because it's one point four I put the zero if I wanted to equals 3500 because one plus point 40 is 1.4 and then in doing this we remember solving for x I'm multiplying so I divide and now really in the print statement I'm doing this 3500 divided by 1.4 and we see how in setting this up you know you could write your math in here some notes for yourself the formula you're using and then plug in the numbers so then we see what's the actual math that we're doing and then oh dividing by 1.4 so we'll do that and that's the one thing that will print the others are comments there you go 2500 so we have some of these all right and I actually want to skip over to this baseball one I skipped over that because I think those others are more straightforward now let's take a look at making use of you know as you're building these this notebook for yourself let's make use of the system of equations one so if we look at number 15 the local baseball team sells tickets with two price zones seats behind the plate from first base to third are priced at twenty dollars per ticket all the other seats down the baselines are ten dollars a ticket and last night's game 5332 fans were in attendance and the total ticket revenue is worth 71,000 how many tickets were in each zone so let's call x the good zone behind home plate those the twenty dollar tickets and let's call y the ones that are further out so we have the two things we want we want to know how many tickets in each zone so let's think about equations for this so twenty dollars for the good tickets ten dollars for the lower price tickets and the revenue is seventy one thousand seven fifty so if we go to our solvent graph and again you might have this you might have your table of contents jump right to it solvent graph we'll call the variables x and y and you can even write some more stuff in here and you know delete it later so let's take a look at this if our two equations are twenty dollars times x number of tickets plus ten dollars times y how many of those tickets did we sell equals that total seventy one thousand let's make sure we get it exact seventy one thousand seven fifty so now we have an equation for the revenue twenty dollars times this many tickets the good tickets plus ten dollars times this many tickets that are further out equals this how much this much money that but the error now i have two variables i want to solve this i need another equation so what about that second equation five thousand three hundred thirty two fans were in attendance so x and y were the number of tickets in each section so x plus y must equal five thousand three hundred thirty two okay so in the way we have this set up here we can just set this equal to zero so let's take the first equation and we're just going to put this twenty times x plus ten dollars times x plus ten dollars x plus ten times y and then equal to zero i just subtract that other value seven one seven five zero and then that would be that equal to zero all right and the second equation set equal to zero so x plus y so i'll do x plus y and then minus five three three two that would make that set equal to zero and this is the idea you can you can add other things here if you want to factor and then just setting up these equal to zero is the easiest way to set it up because remember we already set this up to solve factor it and then graph it and the graph you know just might help visualize it and when we solve this so there we go see the solution here and 1843 and 3489 so that's how many of each because when we add these up then because when we add these up then that's going to be five three three two and there we go that now we know how many of each each ticket so 1843 people sat you know from first base to third and 3489 as we expect that's there's more room out there in the outfield and beyond so you know that's how many people sat out there and now and now we can figure this out and we see the graph just to see the comparison here so pretty cool we can we can figure out given this information how many people sat in each place and who knows maybe if it wasn't totally sold out we can get a breakdown all right and you know some other applications we'll skip some of the percent increase maybe we'll take a look at this one here so number 15 from page 84 so if gabriel is famous for her trail mix recipe let's talk about but the by weight her recipe calls for 50 percent pretzels 30 percent cheerios 20 peanuts and she wants to make two kilograms of this mix so we could just calculate how much of each she's mixing so pretzels cheerios and peanuts and this one we could just go right to right to here and before i even get to a print statement we could just define some variables in python we like to use the underscore so maybe pretzel weight maybe we'll do pretzel uh pretzel there we go equals 0.5 times two times two because it was 50 percent pretzels and she wants to make two kilograms cheerios is going to be 30 percent and peanuts 20 percent so cheerios equals 0.3 times two and then uh peanuts equals 0.2 times two now we have now we're going to we know that we have the weight of each of these and you can put comments in there for yourself if you need to and now we want to uh talk about the cost so there we go if we have the the cost so all of this pretzels times 9.999 and so if we have this our cost equals pretzel times 9.99 because that's how many kilograms at 9.99 a kilogram plus and we'll look at cheerios 6.99 and peanuts 4.95 plus cheerios times 6.99 plus peanuts times 4.95 so now we have the total cost here and that should be then the cost for two kilograms fine but the question then asks what's the average cost per 100 grams so 100 grams compared to two kilograms is divided by 20 and we could do the comparison if we wanted to also bring it up to the proportion earlier on in this notebook but knowing that this is two kilograms 100 grams and so it's we can just put this in the print statement cost divided by 20 because that's the cost for 100 grams there we go so how many of each if we're making two kilograms but then the final question uh we need to divide it by 20 we only want 100 grams 100 grams and there we go 80 cents which makes sense because if we take a look at the total cost for each of these yeah when we when we're buying this full two kilograms you know given these rates yeah that's 16 dollars worth of trail mix i mean you know hopefully two kilograms of this this mix it'll last a while so she just wants to make 100 grams so that's why she is just dividing it by 20 100 grams you know so that people can eat it before it goes stale there you go 80 cents all right not bad so some other things that we can look at making use of these calculators that we have we can take a look at things like various like options for things like green energy and so i i put in here you know just a link to one thing you know one thing and it was i think i did one solar panel one battery so supposing you know you want to buy this you know live live off the grid or you know supplement electricity for somewhere so here's a solar panel charges up a battery and the cost was 245 dollars and then the output is 110 watt hours now 111 so you can certainly recharge this as as as much as possible that's just you know that output i normally would then think about this as using 111 watts for an hour and 111 watts that should be enough to charge you know power your laptop charge a phone few light bulbs also so you know that's something you know you could easily make use of 111 watts like i said laptop charge phone power a few light bulbs that'll be plenty and then that way so what what this would be is so the uh electricity very often is in kilowatt hours because we use so much and that's like 15 cents i think is about the national average so 111 watts that's you know 10 of that a little bit less so yes that is 1.5 cents so you know this you know this 111 watt hours and i was thinking you use 111 watts for an hour so that would save you a 1.5 cents okay now beyond the savings if you're also doing this for the sake of being off the grid or you know uh you want to run run some stuff like out in the middle of nowhere where you can't really plug it in well that's the value of this but let's just say you want to compare this to electricity cost so you know that 245 dollars and if you run this for you know all you're making full use of all this for an hour then it'd be 16 000 hours and dividing that out um rough estimate you know doing a little bit of rounding here thousand days you know which is you know a little bit less than three years and if you do that you could uh you know pay for itself in a thousand days which for a lot of investments that's not that bad and then after that free electricity you know you paid for this and all along the way you know you're saving this money for the thousand thousand days and then after that there you go you've already saved enough money to pay for it and you get the free electricity i did another one just as another comparison so this wind turbine i find all these nice you know it's kind of interesting isn't it you know it's kind of interesting so uh did that not click there we go so this particular wind turbine that can handle like low winds and it's rated for you know 400 watts but um the idea is that if it's low wind it might be a whole lot less and somewhere in here you know it can say 2.5 meters per second low wind speed which should be about five miles an hour and even at that point it'll turn it'll generate some electricity so let's say we have something like this and this one was 270 dollars 400 watts but low low wind it may just be 40 watts that's okay so let's just say you can generate 40 watts for 24 hours because not dependent on the sun not dependent on the sun you know you could have wind blowing anytime and we round that up to one kilowatt per day 40 watts it'd be like you know 960 watts we'll round it up because this is all just an estimate anyway so that one kilowatt hour you know on average costs about 15 cents so if you have it somewhere where it's low wind there we go that 270 dollars divided by 15 cents gives you how many days 1800 days so this one would be if it was low wind we're talking like five years to pay for itself and then after that you know free electricity again even five years not so bad as a return on your investment but i just happen to mention if you if you do live in a windy area and let's say you can produce a constant 400 watts you know this is a lot of places you know especially if you're near like a body of water sometimes lakes ocean bay you know wide river you could definitely get a consistent wind and if that's the case there you go and it would only take about half a year to pay for itself because if you're producing this 400 watts that's 9.6 kilowatt hours per day or dollar 44 and then just do that division you know 270 divided by a dollar 44 187 days you know just over half a year and really then enough wind in enough space hey by three of them and because you're making you know you're generating 400 watts uh three of them is probably enough to power you know somebody's house like everything so you know you're you're you're saying you would be saving all that electricity you'd be making use of the three of them and power the whole house yeah about six months so uh you know the same that it would be that about that same yeah so really interesting and this is the thing like you can do these calculations i just wrote them here but you can also bring up the google co-lab and do these different calculations graph different things if you wanted to see see it and that that that's the idea with having all all you know all the math calculations you know at your fingertips you can count you can calculate things and figure out is it worth it for me oh hey if i spend this much money and then you know generate this for electricity yeah maybe or or you might say it's not a priority right now and you know that's it but you but you know based on the numbers so that's that's really some of the some of the uses of of some of the math we've been doing and you know also making use of you know the co-lab uh graphing some different things or solving some problems so hopefully this was this was useful and hopefully this gives you ideas of other things you can do once you set up your your uh co-lab notebooks and you have the ability to calculate and graph some different things you know make use of it to see what you can do to make money or save yourself money all right and we'll go on to the next unit then so let's talk about quadratics so the word quad means square so why would we have you know quad square but then it's and we call this x squared but yet there's a two so where does the square come from the square in quadratics comes from the idea so where does the square come from the square in quadratics comes from the idea and this goes back to the original algebra back with al-khorizmi so the if i have a square and you know i don't know each side i'm just going to call them x but then the area of that square would be x times x would be x squared and that's where that's really where this notion of quadratics comes from you know as actually tied to physical area the area of a square but there's a lot of other applications and this comes up so often that we get beyond even the the actual measurements and we can use this for a lot of other things so we look at the our equation y equals x squared so if i were to graph this and when we get into the code we're going to get into graphing and we're going to look at some of those applications too but when i'm going when i graph this anytime i graph a quadratic it's going to be a parabola and you know it'll probably look like a nicer parabola than that but it'll be a parabola so that means you know and if we can picture this the positive values for x give me you know i square them and give me some y value but then the negative values when i square that negative times the negative makes it a positive so that's why it curves back around and so you know we keep going up and then these two ends go on as long as you want them to but yeah the the negative x values get squared so then the y values would still be positive i still can get negative y values because if in my graph i subtract something you know i can subtract you know five or something like that so there's definitely some x values there that even squared are less than five so when i subtract i get a negative y value so you can still do that but you see the the general trend of the parabola here and they you know kind of look like a smile but if you have if you have a negative x value you so any negative x value it looks like a frown so our coefficients here that one would would be negative so let's yeah let's take a look at this if i had any general quadratic and this is the general form so if i have the general form of any quadratic would be y equals ax squared plus bx plus c and that covers all the possible coefficients for any quadratic equation so a would be my coefficient for the x squared term b would be my coefficient for the x term and then c would be the constant and if i look at these as long as a has a number then i can have a quadratic b and c can be zero like the original y equals x squared oh well there's no x term b is zero c was zero and then the other one i i brought up i put minus five so then c would be minus five b would still be zero so there we go the general form for any quadratic and as long as a has a number to it then it's a quadratic a just can't be zero then it's some some other type so if we take a look at this and you know a is negative it opens down like a frown a is positive opens up like a smile and the other thing about these quadratics is they're all symmetrical so the vertex is the point at the bottom or at the top depending on how it turns up of where the gravel turns around so since it's symmetrical the x value is going to be this definite formula negative b over 2a so what i have is once i have a b and c i can plug in my four my values for a and b and get the x value for the vertex and then once i get the x value i would plug that x value in to get the y value and then i'd have this point and then that would be the point that if i had my parabola that would be the point at the very bottom where it turns around and also just looking at that x value remember they're symmetrical so that would divide the parabola nicely so we're going to look at doing this in the code importing a b and c and then finding the vertex finding a lot of other things so we're going to make use of the code to be able to do that so i'm not going to worry about all the factoring here but what i am going to show you is one other thing that we're also going to look at the code but sometimes it helps to see this formula is a lot of times when i graph this if i were to graph the parabola you know here's my x y and you know let's say i have a parabola there i might also be interested in the roots where does the parabola cross the x-axis and so when it crosses the x-axis then y would be zero because you know on the axis i'm not going up or down at all so if i have something you know we would talk about solving for x but if i have something like this yes i have equal zero and i have one variable which is x how would i solve it we approach it a little bit differently than we would the other the other ones because when i square root something and that's going to happen as a part of the process when i square root something the answers the positive there's positive or negative possibilities because if i had if i had the square if i had let's say four and then the square root that it's positive four or negative four because if i had or positive two because if i had two squared that equals four but if i had negative two squared that would also equal positive four so if i'm going the other way if i have a four and i'm square rooting yes it could be positive two or it could have been negative two and so when i'm finding the roots for a quadratic you know setting this equal to zero one of the steps is going to involve square rooting which gives me a possibility of a positive or negative answer and then that's where we have you know our two possible answers and so that's how in one formula you know many quadratics you know the way they cross they're going to cross the x-axis and touch it twice so to find the roots i want to find out those two values and the formula will give it to us so again knowing a b and c the quadratic formula all right so and notice it's that that vertex plus or minus something and then that's how we use plus or minus square root of b squared minus four a c all over two a again so this is the quadratic formula that you know because i have plus or minus it will give it will give me two roots you know i know and we'll see in the code we would run through this once for plus get that answer once for minus get that answer there we go but also since i'm square rooting something we're just we're going to stick with the real numbers here and if i have a negative value under this radical then there's no real solution so you know we could get into imaginary numbers and you know it's not real solution but why should we let that stop us but for our purposes we're not going to worry about that we're going to say that if it's negative then there's no real solution and we're going to just stop there so in doing this i would often test this we call this part under here the discriminant and i would often test this you know b squared minus four ac does that is that zero actually that can be zero which is fine because that'd be plus or minus zero you know that means it would have one root it would just touch the x-axis that's fine but if it's negative then that means i have no roots and i would have a parabola that just never touched the x-axis so that's that's perfectly fine it's possible and in that case i would test that first and if i knew that then that would save me some time you know not having to do all this because you know if we did this old school and just factored it all out you know right right in the notebook you know sometimes it takes a while we're going to look at how to make this a lot easier you know writing the code we're going to put these formulas in and then we're going to find the roots in the vertex oh you know maybe we'll even graph them too so this is the formula and notice in math they're both had the same denominator so i could i could make this all over one denominator like that works out you know do the adding or subtracting in the numerator all over one denominator and mathematically that works out you know it's another way to write it so this is very often this is the quadratic formula as we would often see it just like this all that all over 2a all over 2a and so for as complex as this could be there's only a few formulas all right i see this i get a b and c formula for the vertex formula for the roots we look at graphing it and then we'll you know then we can look at some of the applications but this is where this is kind of the essence of looking at quadratics here and so now let's take a look and we'll go into some other um well you know how to solve these formulas and everything so let's take a look at the code so solving a quadratic equation is much easier with code because all the formulas that we were talking about that we would work out by hand we're just going to put them all into the code so so you can just define a b and c once and then run those values through all the formulas you need and output your answer roots vertex and whatever else you need so i just picked some values here that work out uh nicely a b and c and what do we want to do let's first of all just print it so we'll print out what our function is then we'll calculate the vertex so notice vx i call the variable and that's the negative b over 2a that's going to calculate the x value and uh python does no order of operations but this 2a does need to be in parentheses because it is the whole denominator so we get that x value and then we're going to take that x value and plug that in for the one for the y value a times and my x value vx and then square it plus b times vx plus c so i get i plug all that in get the y value and just like before i'll print it now um there we go we just print the equation now we have the vertex as a point and we'll go on to the roots and the roots remember the quadratic formula d it works at abcd but it's actually d is for determinant here that's the part that's underneath the square root because if that's negative then i won't have any real roots and so i'll just define d as that part under the square root b squared minus 4ac and then i'll test it here if d is greater than or equal to zero because if it's not then i'm going to print out no real roots so if as long as it's greater than or equal to then we're going to calculate the roots and remember it's the rest of the quadratic formula so since i already figured out d i'll make use of that so negative b plus or minus so we're going to run through this twice for the first root negative b plus the square root of d and then all that's over 2a and notice parentheses for the numerator parentheses for the denominator and then the second root negative b minus the square root of d and then all that's over 2a so i'll print this out calculate the roots print it out or you know no real roots if that's the case and there we go so i actually already ran this and what do we have y equals so x1 x2 x2 plus 5x plus 6 and then we have the vertex is this negative 2.5 negative 0.25 and then the roots x equals 2 negative 2 and x equals negative 3 so there we go if all you need to do is solve it it's nice to have all these formulas at the ready just change a b and c and run it again so if we want to graph it also we can do everything we were doing plus the graphing part remember our imports for graphing matplotlibrary numpy i'm also going to import math for some things that we'll do i'm going to define a b and c i just pick different numbers here and i'm going to print out a b and c so this part is very similar i'm going to print this out calculate the vertex print that out and now we get into the graphing so notice i didn't do the roots yet and we just have x min x max you know everything else we were doing for graphing define the x values set up the plot and now i can graph the parabola i just called it y1 even though i probably won't have a second y value here ax squared plus bx plus c there we go i'm going to graph that whole parabola and then that's y1 so i'm going to plot x and y1 then i'm going to plot the vertex as a point so i put this all down here for the the plotting parabola the vertex point and then notice this one up here by default it's going to be a line and here i'm defining two arrays each of them with one item and then that's going to be a red dot so then we're going to find and plot the roots everything we were doing with calculating the roots from before but i'm going to add this one line here pi dot plot and once i get the plot i'm going to plot root one root one zero and root two zero and remember you know the array of my x values and then the y values and this one is going to be a green dot so that's why it's good so it's going to be a green circle so i'm going to plot that and then i'm also going to print out the roots because i want to see that too so when we have all this and then we run it it'll have your equation here there you go x squared plus four x plus one give you the vertex and give you the roots now these roots are irrational you know that's why it gets this wacky decimal we could you know do quite a few more lines of code to get to the wacky radical answer but we're not going to worry about that now that that's that's perfectly fine if you're writing this down somewhere you might round it to a couple decimal places but here we go we plot the vertex as a red dot the roots as green dots you know see where it crosses the x-axis and then we graph the parabola and so i can redo this then let's just try these numbers that we were doing before one five there we go six and that's all we need to do change a b and c and it'll run through and calculate all this there we go x squared plus five x plus six and here's the vertex negative two point five negative point two five and then the roots two and negative two and negative three there we go now there we go negative two negative three where it crosses the x-axis and see the y value of that vertex is negative point two five so it's two five so it's just below it but just barely and there we go so we can plot our quadratic formula we can graph it we can get our roots in our vertex and for most things when you're solving quadratics that's what you want to do so let's take a look at how a b and c actually affect the graph so i'm going to show you some sliders here and that's going to come up again in one of the other notebooks so how a b and c so the first thing is we're going to import this and just that way map plot live in line and we're going to write that first and then we're going to import these widgets and interactive the same and then the same other things we're going to do with the plot so the way that these widgets work is we're going to put all the graphing in this function so now we're going to connect again with functions here i still defined it just as f and that's because later on i wanted that to be a short name for that line but you'll see so i'm going to define this f but it's the function of a b and c i'm going to take those three things a b and c as inputs now you could always make this say quadratic and you know do everything that you want to do with the quadratic roots vertex we could actually take everything that we were doing before with the plotting and with solving and put all that in this function at that point i would call it more than just that if i might say quadratic and take the argument a b and c and do everything you need so kind of cool that you can do that but here we're just going to focus on the graphing so my function there we go x min x max all those i'm going to define all these things for graphing remember a b and c would be the input so we would have those and then plot the the parabola plot plot the the parabola plot uh the vertex as a point plot the roots as points and um there we go this all of this here is really just extra for the sake of setting the equation as the title of the graph i did that instead of printing it out which i guess we could we could have done but i wanted to show you we could set it as the title of the graph and the title needs to be a string so here i'm going to take a b and c and convert them all to strings then i'm going to take all of this and i was you know this doesn't necessarily connect with html but i was thinking of that h1 for the heading so i'm just going to combine all these or concatenate all these that exact y equals combined with sa that string and i'm going to combine all these as h1 but if i just leave it at that it'll still display in a weird way as the title there'll be like extra quotes and i don't like that so i'm going to just find this other one h2 which just it's just blank with quotes and that's going to be a string and i'm going to loop through this for w in h1 you know w like for word in h1 and then h2 equals h2 plus w so i still had to convert these two strings put it all together as h1 but then i still needed to put it in h2 if i do it this way combining these now h2 is a nice unified string without a lot of extra quotes and so that's you know again it's a lot to just it all leads up to the sake of for the sake of putting this as the title okay and you know we'll see hopefully you know it looks nice and you know you see oh that was you say oh that was worth it all right so here's where the interactive comes in so we have this interactive plot now that's just the variable that i chose interactive plot but here's what's really happening this interactive function so if we take a look at this so it runs this function f so that's where the name of your function goes and that's where you see how long this line got i wanted this to be short so i just that's why i called it f so it runs this function and then that function and then it defines a with a range from one to nine b with a range from negative nine to nine and c also with a range from negative nine to nine a i started at one because if it was zero that's actually not a quadratic and i want to illustrate quadratics and so i'll start at one so we just define this interactive plot and then notice this as the last line of code then if i just say interactive plot it's going to print it's going to run that so we'll see this interactive how that makes the sliders here there we go and it default shows them in the middle and see this is what i wanted it to be that when it starts out you see the title of the graph y equals five x squared plus zero x plus zero you see that's it just and if i go if i make that down to one this is the parent graph the most basic parabola you know x squared and i don't have to put the plus zero but in this case it's going to write that every time and then we can see what happens if i move c you see i can move c and it'll adjust the graph it'll adjust the title of the graph there we go and then we can see what happens if i move b b you see it moves it along here and now it got to this point that now where it is i do have roots in the vertex that i can display and then if i have i can see where b as i move that around affects this whole graph and i can see then how a affects the whole graph so we see some different things that we can do and all these are going to be accessible to you you can tinker with these but this is all you know it was just i wanted to show you this interactive that you can set up sliders and in this case to display the display the graph see the roots in the vertex you see and i move that down so we display the graph see the roots in the vertex and adjust it with sliders you can see how a b and c affect the graph so knowing this and being able to have all this code at your disposal you can really see you know most everything that you're going to need to do with quadratics you know find the roots in the vertex see the graph and you know adjust it and you know do some other things so there we go this and some practice you'll you'll know quadratics inside and out um now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use that use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so here we're going to walk through the foundational math certification too and if you have not already done it please give this a try on your own this is for if you're if you've already done that and you're stuck or if you just had a question about one of the parts you know we'll hopefully answer all those and just like the other certifications this one you're going to make a copy and put this in your uh in your google drive so you know file save a copy in your drive and this one we're going to focus on building cartesian graphs so most of this is going to deal with graphing we're going to look at some different functions and what you can do with that so you make a copy in your google drive it might be in your google colab notebooks folder where you can put it wherever you want and now hopefully you know i already did that so hopefully you're now working from your copy and we need to acquire the testing library so the code that you write just like the certification one the code do you write when you run it it'll run through it'll run through these tests to see if the code is what it's supposed to be and then give you some feedback so this first cell you don't need to do anything and you might just take note of what you need to do here for future reference in case you want to have your own custom library that you know you include in your colab notebook so this custom library it's on github and this code is going to get that and save it here in a work in a local working directory so you will need to run this for each new session as i mentioned before it'll the session will time out because of an activity after 30 minutes at the most or even if you're busy 12 hours it'll time out so each new session run this and it'll go through and then import the library so we click to run yep and see just a few seconds code test passed so there we go so let's take a look at some coordinates here cartesian coordinates and they're named from renee decart because that's part of his name cart and you know that's it you know you've arrived in life when your last name becomes an adjective so he among other things invented this x y coordinate system that we're familiar with with zero zero in the center and then x moving horizontally positive to the right negative to the left and y moving vertically positive up negative down so then each x y coordinate tells you you know how much you're going over and how much you're going up and we can plot all these points our go-to library is going to be matplot library and as we were talking about importing your own personal library custom library we needed to do that in a little bit different ways a few more lines but a lot of the common libraries uh i say commonly you know reasonably used i've been around a little bit uh behind the scenes google colab already did that install part so you just need to worry about importing it so you know we have that nice benefit you know things just work in the google colab so matplotlib.py plot and we're importing this library yeah that's a mouthful so we're going to import it as plt that way every time i reference it plt.plt. i don't have to rewrite all this okay so this is going to be the first thing is the basic just here's a graph there we go and you probably could change these variables but i don't this is what's in the example in the documentation for matplot library so i keep these and it does seem weird that you're assigning two different variables to this but it's you could have multiple subplots we're not going to worry about that right here but you could have multiple subplots and you know your one graph could have like nine little graphs in it if you wanted or something like that but so that you would put numbers in there but we're not worried about that now this establishes that this plot exists and then plt.show that's always going to be our last thing to show it you run it and there's our basic graph notice we didn't add anything else um so there's not nothing going on here and zero zero instead of being in the middle it's in the bottom left because we're just showing the positive quadrant here so just positive x values up to one positive y values up to one and that's it and notice all these the test and yes code test passed if you click the button correctly so we'll go to step two all right so now we have the standard window still not highlighting each axis and we're still going to go through import this establish this but now we're going to add something here so this gives us the size of the graph and i just put this here we're this would be better we're going to modify this as we go on but that'll give us the size of the graph 10 in every direction so when we do plot.show so you see it does give us 10 in the direction and if you follow these the zero zero exists in the middle here even if you don't see the axis lines and zero you know positive to the right up to 10 negative to the left down to negative 10 and on the y axis zero in the middle positive up to 10 negative down to negative 10 so they could line up in the middle here somewhere all right and this one was one of these that i ask you to change the values then rerun so it's run this to see what it looks like then change the window size to 20 in each direction so we go through here and we can just move this 20 20 in each direction now we notice from this even the one where we only went up to one the size of this graph doesn't change but we see the lines on the outside do and the tick marks change so now we're going up to 20 in each direction there we go code test passed so some more graph dimensions now this is where i was saying we're going to modify this this is really what we were doing in that last one plt.axis so what were those numbers it really was an array of x minimum x maximum y minimum y maximum as just one group notice the parentheses and then the open brackets so that was an array and that was that defines the window size so that's why it's plt.axis so i think it just makes much more sense to define those as variables up here so this line here the plt.axis does not need to change and then it's really easy for you to then change the window size if you want you just change those numbers so there we go and this one is not one oh yeah this one is you could run it notice it should still do the same thing there we go and then we're just going to change these to 20 in each direction 20 you know and again we see 20 in each direction so this is going to be our go-to way to set up the graph and as we keep going let's look at those those axis lines that you might be making and we're going to change these to 20 in each direction so we have those axis lines that you might be missing i know i was missing them so how do we want to display these well we have our basic graph and we have the directions here if you were doing this on your own that the b that we're going to see here makes the line blue so we have this dimensions that we're building upon and these first two lines there we go subplots the window size so now we have the plt.plot and that's going to get plot a line for us or points now in this case we have this array here from x min to x max and then this array here what this is is a an array of the x values and then the y values so we have so we have it starts from x min zero and then goes to x max zero and rather than plot to those two points it plots a line from that point to that point and with this the line is going to be blue if you don't put something like this in here python will pick the color of the line for you and then for the y-axis then we're going to plot zero zero y min y max so what is this telling us it's from the x value of zero to the y value of y min so from zero y min to zero y max it's going to draw that line and again i'm forcing it into be this this space here whether you have this space or not doesn't matter so there we go so these two plot statements these two these two plot statements define whether you know define that it's going to be a line and then what color and i even have the comments here so then you see blue x-axis blue y-axis so y-axis so that's it we're going to show this plot and we see the x and y-axis we also see again the the value of defining everything up here because then all the rest of these the size of the graph and then where these lines go to and from it's all based on this up top so if i change the dimensions of this then everything else will adjust accordingly and the axis lines will still go to the ends so we run it and then change b to g and there we go change to g b and there we go it's green so you can make it whatever you want i just happen to like blue so there we go changing these so now supposing i wanted to plot a point like we saw that we did that into define a line we're going to plot a point well see as we continue to build this define these values here and now we're going to we're just going to end up keeping all of this as the window size and then the x and y-axis and keeping it blue so how do i plot exactly one point so notice this array of x values of which there's only one in there and y values so it's five four now here's what else we have it's ro that o makes it a point in fact a circular dot so if i have just b with nothing that's going to make it a line if i actually just had r with nothing that would make it a line but it actually has nowhere to go too so that would be weird but ro makes it a point and we'll see we can plot other things too so keeping all that the same and just plotting this one point one point there we go one point and it is five at five four over five up four now we could put the grid lines in but that'll be another story so now change the location so the directions run it then change the location to negative five one one okay so then we just change this to negative five and change this to one there we go and when we run it so we see negative five one all right so plotting a point we indicate that it's a point this way and plotting a line we have other ways to indicate that so how would i plot several points well let's take a look all right so a ray is to plot each point you know that's what we've been doing and we can still define it as an array here i'm just going to define the array here an array of the array here an array of x values and an array of y values so if i have these x values and y values we go down here so notice all that's still the same and here i can plot x y now i chose x y because you know x values and y values and i did not use exactly x and y as other variables already so we're okay i mean you really could name these arrays whatever you want but there we go we have what am i plotting the array of x values the array of y values and then here i have red points for each of them now right here i only have one l one number in each so we can add so that's the assignment for this step add two numbers to each so that also graphs one one and two five okay so the x value would be one and the y value would be one so there you go so i have point four two and then point one one and the next one two five so x value would be two y value would be five and there we go all right and changing those arrays now i can plot i still don't have to change this code plot that array and we see three different points because each of them because each of them i made a red point so let's mix it up let's plot some points and some lines okay so that's it hopefully you are noticing the subtle difference between the points and the lines each plot statements takes an array of x values an array of y values and a third argument to tell you what you're plotting so the default plot is a line if you actually skip that third argument it would give you a line and python would pick the color rbg indicate the colors and cmyk actually also work as just letters and beyond that there's actually a few other colors where you can just write in the word for the color give it a try you know i'm not gonna list all the possible colors but yeah give it a try and so these are the colors so then we have if it's a dot it's going to be ro the o indicates a dot rs you could plot a square and then r with a little carrot symbol would be a triangle so that if you have different things you're plotting you can mix it up and have dots or squares or triangles and then of course that combined with the different colors you can plot a lot of different things on one graph so notice we've already defined these arrays here and i'll call this one line x line y point x point y so yeah not liney and pointy and there we go so we have these we'll keep all these defining the graph the same way and let's plot so if i wanted to plot so the directions are a lot of red line and two green squares so if i plot here so line x comma line y and we want it to be red and it's a line so there we go and point x point y and it's a green square gs so you see if you've been working through the course hopefully this is a review and if you're coming at this you know relatively new hopefully it's seeming pretty straightforward but then the more you do this the more you just get familiar with with graphing everything and you know you'll be able to do this right off the top of your head so we graph this and we will see so there's the red line from that point to that point and the green squares over here here so there we go so we see how we can graph a line and different points okay so here's a scatter plot game and i call this making a scatter plot game but i kind of made the game so but we could take a look so this is what we want to do we want to look through this code how can i plot a random point and then you know you're going to try to guess the point i made the i made this uh you know a smaller axis for whatever reason and we'll define this once and here's what we're doing each time if we are we're going to get an x point which is going to be a random number so notice how this this is going to be good for different games or different things you do import random yes there's a whole library of randomness and random dot rand int and it gives the range here from x min to x max from x min to x max and actually the way most ranges work in python x min is a possibility but x max is x max it will won't go to that it'll go to the number before so y point y min y max so there we go so you see again if i change these dimensions it will still give me a random integer that so now if x point is the random integer then i'm going to store that as my x value store this as my y value and you see essentially it is an array with one element you know but then and i might have been able to skip this step but i like really spelling it out you know what what this is and now we go here i'm going to apply as a dot so there we go this uh gives the grid now this is we you know we had their axis lines this is the grid plt dot grid so that'll help because the game is going to be here's the point you tell me what the coordinates are so that's what this is yes and we're going to prompt for input enter the coordinates of the red point and that's going to be an x y with a comma so we're going to split it at the comma and that's going to be an array with two elements so then yes array zero so the first element cast as an integer that's going to be the x guess and the second element is the y value cast as an integer that's going to be the y guess and this is part of why i like to break it up here because i have this here these are the points this defines it as an array but this is the point that we wanted so we test it if x guess equals x point and y guess equals y point then that's going to increment your score and there we go all this in the loop and then if statements in the loop now the loop's done and you know in range zero to three we really because we're including zero we actually don't need that zero the range will start at zero by default so there we go for i in range it's going to go through it three times because it'll be zero one two and then again python ranges if it's range three it won't do three it'll do zero one two and then that's it it so we go through and guess it three times and then print out the score so the score was way at the top initialize it at zero and we'll see see what happens here so you see with the grid lines we can see so zero and look at these four five so the coordinates of the red point would be zero five and here we have zero negative three zero negative three and this is why i made it eight in every direction because it actually the grid lines just work out a little bit better so what's the coordinate of this point so looks like three on the x-axis and then down three so that would be three negative three all right and there we go you can try this out it'd be a good way to test your understanding of coordinates all right and step nine so now if i want to graph a whole linear equation so this was nice if i define these two points and i can draw a line between them but what if i actually just want the whole linear equation so numpy is the library we're going to use for that so we're going to import numpy as np now that one i mean numpy is not that big of a word to write but as np it just seems to be a common thing so you will see np dot this or np dot that for the different functions all right and then we have the linspace function so that defines an array of values an array of values when we're talking about functions we can you know loop through but this gives us that array and we're going to plot the function with two arguments so if we take a look at this all these so after we import numpy same setup for the graph and then linspace we give this now i purposefully made it a little bit less you actually we'll get to some other things that we can do with this that'll make it even better but i made it purposefully a little bit less than the maximum values here on the graph and then the third argument so it goes from it's the x values is what we want for this so the x value goes from negative nine to nine and in that there are 36 points so believe believe it or not that's actually going to be enough which is you know four points you know like every one fourth is a point that's actually going to be enough and notice then what we're plotting here are x values and you see that's the array of x values numpy gives us that array so that x values and then given this i can just put this equation in here as that's the y value each time so as it goes through this array of x values that y value is going to it calculated each time and then that's what it's going to plot so then when we run this we see that it actually plotted this point this this graph there we go two x minus three and yep looks like it crossed there about negative three and looks like about up two over one etc okay so there we go um um and we have this run it and then change it to graph negative x plus three so all these can stay the same now in this case since this was cut off here we didn't really notice that but if we just then change this to negative x plus three now we see the the limitations of this here because it cut cut off there so what can we do here well we could in this just make this we've already defined x min and x max we could actually make this go from x min to x max and you'll see this come up in the next things we do all right so we can create interactive graphs so in this case we've been talking about linear equations let's let's use these widgets to make a slider so we're going to import all these things here now you know numpy for our array of x values matplot library for the graph for the plot and then we have we're going to import this in line and then the widgets so we can make all the graphing happen in a function and we have there we go function of m and b and if you're if you're working through some of the other things in this course this might be familiar and then we'll see just you know what's the same and what's different about what we're doing here with this function so if i have this function of m and b everything happens in the function defining the x values y the maximum the final x values y the maximum defining all this and in this case we're going to give it a title because we already know that this is going to be a slope intercept equation so we're going to give it that title all right and then we have there we go np.lin space and we could always make this now this time i also rewrote the numbers but you could always make this just x min x max and something else here so what are we going to do here we're going to plot x and then mx plus b because these m and b values are going to come from slider and then the function is going to take that so here's our interactive plot i mean i could have made the variable something different but the function is interactive and then it takes f what's what function and then m equals so we give it a range and b equals and we give it a range and we run this interactive plot so so we can use this to plot now notice it default goes to zero so as soon as i increase m you see now i have a line with the slope of two line with the slope of four and then b is still zero but i can move this up up and i can move it down and we see that i can adjust my graph so it's nice to have these things that we can adjust a graph all right and then if i'm graphing a system so maybe you are already graphing system of equations that then hopefully this is a good review if this is new then take a look at here's one way to graph a system of equations all right same imports and same defining these now here's where we make it a lot better so how many points do i want i'm just going to take it also based on this x max minus x min so that's going to give me remember x min is very often the negative so that's going to give me you know this range and then times two so that might be enough times 10 that might be plenty for even more complicated graphs so that's how many points i have that you know there's the range and then times two and then define the x values once and here we are defining this linspace from x min to x max and then this many points so we see again we're building these i have this comment in there for you but pretty soon then you won't even need that and now we again we have our complete uh our base of what we're importing and then the basics for the graph so then i can plot two lines you know define y1 in terms of x because i just make my x values x because that's convenient and what what am i plotting x and then y1 there we go and in line two notice it doesn't have to be linear this this plot works you know x squared minus three and what am i plotting the x values and then y2 and we can see these so there we go all right change y2 and rerun the code so y2 we're going to make it negative x minus three so we're just going to rerun this as negative x minus three and we see there we go and with these you know i could define what color i want these lines to be but without that python gives me the colors light blue then orange you know it'll go through a few colors and then we'll go through a few colors and then we'll go through light blue then orange you know it'll go through a few colors and there we go defining two points so systems of equations you know so there we go that was graphing two equations and you can graph more if you want systems of equations we're going to import simpy so the simpy library and we probably don't need to import everything but i do for this particular example so the import asterisk is going to import everything from the simpy library and we're going to define these symbols so now i'm going to here i'm going to define x and y as symbols that i'm going to use to solve so i could define these separately and you'll see in other places that we do but what do i have i have lin solve and then notice open parentheses because that's the function for lin solve and then what do i have i have this array of these two equations set equal to zero zero so that's what you know it would be this two times x plus y minus one equals zero and then the other one x minus two times y plus seven equals zero so that's how we have to set it up if i want to solve these two it would be those set equal to zero and then i'm solving for the variables x and y and what happens when i run it it gives me this negative one three as as a point that's the solution there we go so one way to solve systems of equations and if we change these to 2x plus y minus 15 equals zero so 2x plus y minus 15 we'll just change that and then 3x so remember three times x you know we'll write this 3x but in python we have to remember to put the multiplying symbol in there minus y so we're going to flip that part over and that's it just 3x minus y equals zero so there we go and if we run that there we go 39 is the solution so there you go one way one of the ways to solve a system of equations so graphing a system of equations solving a system of equations and you may have already gotten to it set it writing the code to solve and graph and output you know make the output even you know a little bit nicer so if you haven't already gotten to that you will so now we can get the solutions as coordinates so as we saw there it returns a finite set but given that set we can convert that into an x y coordinates so also here i split out first and second as two different as a way to put these here so now when i have this solution i don't have to change this code then solve first second and then we define them up here sometimes that's a little bit easier now we know that that solution is going to be a finite set so this is how we parse it out i'll call this variable x solution is solution dot args zero zero and then the y value is going to be solution dot args zero one and so there we go you don't have to think through like all the different ways that that's organized especially since you know you think that okay there's only one x y solution but there's a lot going on here so now i have these and i'm going to go ahead and so now i have these as x solution y solution and i'm going to print them out x equals y equals and just for kicks i'll also print it out as a coordinate pair so see zero zero i mean it works out because x plus y and x minus y so they would cross a zero zero so there we go again another way to then elevate that and solve it just showing you different different ways that you can parse these things out now we can even get the system from user input so i'm going to print for anybody you know this remember to use python syntax and then notice how each equation is already set equal to zero because i'm going to prompt for the input here first and the first equation and then second and the second equation and i'm not even casting these as anything i don't need to because then linsolve works out like that there you go first second and then parse the solutions so let's do this as long as as long as two things set equal to zero and i do want an x and a y so so i will have three times x plus four minus y so if you think about things in terms of y equals then you could just put a minus y here so three x plus four minus y okay and i just hit enter and it jumped down so now the second equation and we have all right so what if i have five times x what if i have five times x plus five here we go and notice the space minus y here we go hit enter it jumps down and there we go we have an x and a y solution pretty cool all right and then solving graph which which in in this whole course the solving graph we have the you'll see as we build and you know you get more and more familiar with all the different ways to solve and graph then you'll see that we can get more and more elegant solutions here we're going to import matplot library and simpy and numpy so we're using all of these so this one here we're just doing this with linear equations and knowing that it's linear equations notice i'm only asking for m and b separated by a comma so i'll call that input mb1 because then i'm going to split that and make that an array and from that i'm going to take the first one and that must be m and then the next one that must be b so we see that you know take this input i wanted it separated by a comma so then we're going to split it at the comma so that input is a string splitting the string makes the array and then now that array the first one is array the first element element zero i'm going to cast it as a float called m1 and then element one the second element i'm going to cast it as a float and that's going to be b1 and we're going to do the same thing for the second one m and b and then everything's going to be the second mb2 split it at the comma makes that array and then that array the first element cast as a float m2 second element cast as a float b2 and now that i have these i can solve it so here we're using simpy to solve it because i'm going to say that first equation i'm going to give it this variable first is this because i know it would be something in y equals mx plus b so it'd be m1 times x plus b1 and then minus y that would be that set to zero and then there's the second and then linsolve first second and then i'm going to just in case there's just in case there's a weird solution i want to take that solution to three decimal places so i'll take that solution cast as a float and then round it to three decimal places for many things you know i might not need it but i give that option so that you know whatever comes up it works so there we go solution i'm going to find these solutions three decimal places um three decimal places round them and now i have these the x solution and the y solution so then to make sure the window includes it rather than give it to be my normal my normal window and this is a float so if i cast as an integer and then i can add 20 subtract 20 you know i gave it each of these so that way each of these solutions i cast it as an integer and i know that my graph is going to include that solution and then given these you know points how many points do i want and then and then graph x because i already used x in other places so graph x is the value for my x values so there we go min max how many points and here's my y1 is m1 times graph x plus b1 and everything here for the weight y2 m2 times graph x plus b2 so then when we set up the graph and line one there we go graph x y1 and line two and the point so now i'm going to plot the point which is x solution y solution as a point okay so that way whatever equations we have and then print out the value so if we take a look at this x solution y solution we run this this first equation all right so let's see let's call it three five and let's call this one negative one one oh because i didn't put the comma so three five and negative one and there we go six six so we have these and we see these points this is the solution even though it showed up as not a nice integer decimal numbers but then we see the graph and then we see the point where they intersect and these are kind of the things that we want to build upon this is actually one good way to plot and graph where if you know that it's linear then just prompt for those coefficients and we can do that for other types of types of functions you know when we get to the when we get to all the parent graphs and all the different types of functions you see that this is one way we can prompt for you know if it's that type of function prompt for the coefficients and then that works out to solve use those coefficients to generate something in simpy to solve and use them again in that plot library to graph and then we can plot the point display the answer all right pretty good right pretty good so the next thing we have is quadratic functions when it's not a linear equation anymore not not a nice straight line so anything that involves x squared is a quadratic so x squared because it could be the area of a square i don't know the measure of the side but i know that the area would be that side times itself so if i if i have x squared in there there's going to be a parabola and here's the simplest here's the the root formula ax squared plus bx plus c so b and c could be zero they can be any number including zero a has to be a number because if a was zero then i don't have a quadratic so then you know there's the simplest one so now let's take a look at this back to our graphing setting up our points you know range our points linspace all this to set up the graph and i'm just going to have a basic y equals x squared so there we go x y y equals x squared and if we run this that's the most basic parabola so a in that case would be one and b a in that case would be one and you see it does touch it zero zero all right the most basic parabola so now quadratic function abc's let's take a look at abc and let's you let's go back to our interactive and we're going to use these widgets so so this one here all right you have a and b but we forgot c and we could have also put the values on you know in a different way but just did it this way that's fine now notice here it's our interactive that we want ab and c so we're going to run this function f f and we see function here of ab but i want ab and c so that's that's going to be your that'd be your assignment add c to the slider so there we go out here comma c equals and then i'll do the same values negative nine comma nine nine okay so there we go so now i have this interactive i'm going to have three sliders one for a one for b one for c and then when we define the function abc it needs three as the input and the plot is going to be ax squared plus bx and then we have to remember we also have plus c so now when we run it now it's all zeros that doesn't look like anything but as soon as a as soon as a is something now we have a parabola whether it be one now we can just take a look at what does a do to the parabola you see as a gets bigger the parabola gets narrower and zero we don't have a parabola but negative values it flips it so positive like a smile negative like a frown and there we go so let's let's have a positive so now what does c do i'm going to skip over b for a second what does c do notice the parabola keeps the same shape and c just moves it up or down and could be zero that's fine it just touches it zero zero so that's what c does it moves it up or down the y-axis and then b is the most interesting it moves it down and stretches the parabola a little bit now watch what happens when we move it so that was a very negative but now when b if b is zero it's symmetrical on the y-axis but then it goes around and then now positive b value stretches on this side so there we go some interesting things about the quadratic the a b and c and what they each do to the graph so this bottom part or if it's flipped over that'd be the top part where the turnaround happens that's the vertex so that's the point where the parabola turns around and the x value i'll give you the formula here negative b over 2a so the parabola turns around and the x value negative b over 2a so then given those inputs then we're going to create the parabola now this i even have the comment here because certainly i can print x with the two asterisks for the exponent but this is um just another fancier way to output this and you'll see it'll come out as an exponent it'll look like an exponent so supposing then we just prompt for these input values we know we know we're doing a parabola so we just prompt for these input values all right then then what would be the vertex well the x value was negative b over 2a so that's exactly what we're going to do negative b divided by and the 2a both all that needs to be in the denominator so i do need the parentheses so negative b over 2a because if i don't it'll divide by two then multiply by a do an order of operations now if i have that value then given that value what do we have that's the x value so we have a times and remember the general form of probably ax squared but what do i have i have vx is my x value squared plus b x so that'd be vx because i want the x value of the vertex plus c so there we go so i use this a b and c to get the x value of the vertex and then i'm going to plug that in to get the y value of the vertex and then we can plot it and then x minimum so for whatever we enter we'll just make sure that that does show up on the graph so counting whatever these values are and you know there you go take it as an integer take it as an integer and that's 10 minus 10 there we go and it's going to plot this point so notice just that x value just that y value as a red point and i probably could have done this based on x min x max but just doing this anyway notice the lin space just giving us that enough before and after it and then here's the y value so then we plot x y without the third argument by default it's going to be a line and then python will pick the color so let's see let's take a look so it's going to show us you see that's ax squared you see that little two that was the whole idea to get it to be that fancy so ax squared let's just try this one a is one and b is let's say negative negative five and c is six how about that so we see the vertex and the vertex is 2.5 negative 0.25 and we see the parabola and then we see the vertex plotted so pretty cool and that's it just same formula so if we just prompt for those coefficients and run it through those formulas we can plot this this graph just like we did the linear equation plotted for m and b we can do a quadratic and plot for a b and c so you know we could we could do this again and see some different graphs so now let's take a look at how to apply these parabola qualities to projectile motion and yes everything going through the air is a projectile and they all actually make the path of the parabola pretty interesting it can't not be a parabola so as we look at these the path of every projectile the graph of this that we're going to look at is going to be for something thrown up in the air straight up in the air so in this case the a value is going to be negative 4.9 each time because it accounts for gravity and that would be in meters per second squared so we know that the a value stays the same the b value represents the initial velocity so that'll change depending on how hard you throw the ball up in the air or launch something so that gets their initial velocity is b and then the c value is the initial height so c would be zero if something started on the ground you know like kicking kicking a ball and if it was on the ground you know the path of the ball is a parabola and then in that case c would be zero the initial height in meters so we have our classic quadratic ax squared plus bx plus c and in that case x is going to be time in seconds and then y is the height at any given time so let's take a look at how this is similar to what we were just doing but a little bit different so a stays negative 4.9 so i don't even need to prompt for that if it's a projectile that's going to stay the same the initial velocity i'm going to prompt for it and cast it as a float because remember the input will come in as a string so rather than just say oh what's b i'll prompt it as initial velocity and then c would be initial height now once we have those you can and i already did copy the vx and vy code from the last step because the equations for the vertex are exactly the same so you know once we have these then we use the same formulas vx and vy then if i'm going to graph it i'm going to change these now our default is always 10 in every direction just seems like a good starting point but really we just are going to be concerned about positive values here so i made x min negative one just that little bit negative just so that you can see the axis same with y min made a negative one just so that you can see the axis but any negative values won't apply here now because these were float values up here so how do i get these well the x value i'll tell you this all these parabolas are symmetrical so the x value of the vertex is exactly right down the middle sometimes we call it the line of the middle sometimes we call it the line of symmetry so it's symmetrical so whatever that x value is and we know we're dealing with all positive values here so whatever that x value is of the vertex i'm going to double it so that's why i have two times vx so there you go get that x value double it i should be at the end but i just added 20 just to be sure we see the end of it to you know and maybe a little bit more it just gives a good perspective on the graph so that's it take that x value double it i decided to add 20 but then we have to cast it as an integer because the other ones came in as float values and your dimensions here have to be integers so there we go and then sit with the y value i'll take that vy and yep that's the vertex that's going to be the highest point of our projectile and i'm just going to add 10 to it i figure that's plenty just enough so that you can see see this and it's not right at the edge also casting it as an integer because these need to be integers so this should look familiar we don't need to change this i only i actually changed this to four just to give you know four times this just just in case to make sure our graph isn't choppy two might even have been enough but there you go four should be a nice smooth curve to the graph and there we go we define the x values same function we've been using before and then that that that will work again we need these to be integers for this okay and define the y value as our quadratic ax squared plus bx plus c so now we're going to plot that same stuff we've been doing plot and then we're also going to plot you know a red dot for the vertex and display it so all this is going to be very similar but you'll see the prompting is a little bit different and then the graph the scale will be a little bit different so when we run it initial velocity uh let's call it 40 and initial height two so this could be something like a baseball that you throw up in the air you know you could probably throw it at 40 meters per second straight up and then by the time you release it yeah it's about two meters off the ground and so we see these and you see these and you could always round these i didn't for this but you always could round these numbers but we get the value of the vertex now what this means in time is that just over four seconds after you throw the ball up in the air it will hit its maximum height of a little more than 83 meters 83.6 meters so there we go if you could throw a ball you know that that hard and you see it the reason i have the negatives you see the blue for the for the axis so you know if you could throw a ball at 40 meters per second then uh straight up and you know there you go wow it can reach you know 83 meters in the air and then time wise you know four set four seconds or so in is good where it's going to hit its highest point and then a little more than eight seconds it'll hit the ground so there we go we can see what our parabola would be and you can use this to you know estimate different things relating to parabolas whether it be a ball thrown or a rocket launched yeah there we go so see i i just broke this out as you know see if everything else stays the same see just shifts the graph and here we're going to import all these to display this and rather than put a slider just decided to make this and i made it a negative so we take a look at this take a look uh our x values and then we plot we decided to make create this c value c equals and if we take a look so what do we want in in this range i'm going to actually didn't use c itself as a as a variable before this so i can use that for c in this range then i made it negative x squared plus c and then what are we going to do we're going to plot it you know to find the x values ones up here and here's the y value plot it c value and this just i did that just for the sake of setting the title you know there we go so you'll see how you'll see how that comes up in the title and we're going to display and this little this little display here you'll see how that that just makes it play out the the notice i don't have the defining x min max y min y max this uh plt dot gcf will actually just make the graph fit and each time so here's a python sleep method the argument is actually just in seconds sometimes sleep methods are in milliseconds this one's just in seconds so i wanted to display that and then wait a half a second then clear the output and then and then wait so you'll see it'll display this and then clear the output so you see so all those different c values we can see it grow and we can run this again if you want to see this so all those different c values and notice the the y-axis changed each time because it accommodated the larger graph so we can see that value all i have to do is you know increment c and it's the same shape it just moves up there we go okay so we found the vertex but the quadratic formula since we're dealing with quadratic equations what does this do this gives you the roots now if it was a protractor now if it was a projectile that would be when it hits the ground so you know that's a good way to think about it you know ground level is the x-axis and then you know the roots where does it hit and then you know like roots of anything growing you know wants to go below but we can call them the roots they are the x-intercepts because it's where the line intercepts the x-axis or we can call it the zeros because y equals zero so you'll see it come up with all these different things so now if i know a b and c here's the formula if i were to write it not in code so that if i know you know what x value makes y zero that's the question so that x value would be negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four ac and all of that over two a and notice we have the plus or minus because somewhere along the way deriving this you do a square root and then the square root you have two possible answers so that and that's what it gives you the two possible answers here but also notice this is the common way you write it but this it's the vertex plus or minus something so we often write it like this you know all over one denominator but if you split it up this is the vertex you recognize that formula plus this and then the vertex minus this so you see that's another just another way to write it whether you split it into two fractions or put everything together over one denominator but when you write it this way then you can see that's the vertex plus or minus something and again we were saying that x value of the vertex is right in the middle so it would make sense that that value right in the middle and then plus something and then that value minus something you know that's where we get our two roots you know they're symmetrical you know they're symmetrical all right so given a b and c we have this formula to be able to find the roots now i have again here i'm just going to import math because i need that for the square root and i have it printed out like this where i just have the comment to remind you that that just prints two as an exponent i think that's just a little bit nicer and so i looked that up and found how to print that out nicer so you're going to print this and it's going to be showing you all right ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero and given that then you're going to prompt for a b and c so there we go now here this is where you're going to check so i just put these here we'll define these variables here they're zero but we're going to overwrite them not here but a little bit later because i want to define these variables that they exist outside of this if statement but i want to run it through this if statement here now notice what this is b squared minus four times a times c because remember that's what's underneath the square root here and if that was negative then your answer is imaginary because you can't square root a negative number now certainly you know some mathematicians you know years ago decided well why should we let that stop us if they're not real but for our purposes here we don't want a negative under the square root we're not going to go into imaginary numbers so we're going to test if this is less than zero then we're going to print no real roots and this there's a word actually for this stuff that's underneath the radical here and that's the discriminant because if b squared minus four ac if that was less than zero then there's no real roots if that actually equals zero then this plus or minus doesn't mean anything because plus zero minus zero it's the same thing so if that equals zero then there would be one root and then any other number then it would be two roots and i think that still comes out the most common it's going to have two roots but these other options come out often enough no real roots what that looks like in the graph is a parabola that does not touch or cross the x-axis so you could have that you know just parabola and it opens up and crosses early you know at some higher y value you so that's the discriminant and knowing that tells us you know if it's negative if it's less than zero then there's no real roots it if it if we only have one root if equals zero and there's only one root we're just going to print that out twice and not worry about it so how are we going to translate this this quadratic formula into this well we're going to do x one and two we're going to do the very similar thing just one's going to be plus in the middle one's going to be minus so let's try this so we have negative b let's do the plus side first plus math dot sqrt of b squared minus four times a times c c all right now all of that remember was in the numerator so i'm going to put parentheses around all this as the numerator and then divided by our vertex two divided by two a okay so order of operations all this stuff python will know but then since i have numerator and denominator i'll put everything in the numerator in parentheses and then everything in the denominator in parentheses and then the second root i can really just copy this and paste it here but the difference is it's going to be minus there we go so now a lot of things you can do that you know in solving a quadratic very often we already did the vertex and that and finding the roots these are really common things that you need to do with a quadratic formula so having this there we go showing that display so let's just try numbers that work out pretty nicely one and we have to do five and six let's try that look at that the roots are negative two and three good now i pick those that works out as nice integers but this will still work if you have you know like one five and let's say five you see it does have roots definite real roots but since it doesn't certain ones don't work out and there's actually like a more complicated square root answer for this this that could be a bonus bonus thing to do to output that square root answer so there we go the roots are this and this and you could always also expecting you know that you might have some weird irrational roots you could round it to you know three or four decimal places and i'll leave it up to you if you wanted to to you can put it put this all together and have something where whatever the application you can prompt for a b and c get the roots in the vertex and graph it you know as well as displaying the roots in the vertex so you know just to show you you know we can put these two things together you know some interesting things you can try so sometimes the graph i like the graph but i know it's a parabola i'm much more interested in just a table of values so in this case and just for the sake of it i made this linear so here we go we have this now notice i didn't have a fig dot or a comma x i just have x equals so i'm not going to need the figure here the graph i just want this because this plt dot subplot in matplot library that's that's going to give us a table and access off right because i just want a table so here's our table we're going to we're going to give it a title we're going to run this and then change it and notice how this works i can define my columns and i could use another variable but i just made it cols for columns so i can define my column headings and then each row notice it's a tuple tuple of values so in this case in the first row x is zero and y is zero and then what i can do is in this case since i have this for a in range i just decided to make it from one to ten here's what we do rows dot append and then i'm going to append my x and y values you see so x is my a value whatever that's going to end up being well it's going to be one then two then three and then two a you know just something simple for the y value so this is this is how you can get a table of values rather than graph it you can put it in a loop and append each row so you set the columns set the first row and then append each row so now outside of that loop x dot set title i've already defined it up there and then take a look at this plt dot table and it takes the argument cell text equals rows column label equals calls cell location and you know i feel like that's uh that location's you know okay this goes all the way over here and we just close the parentheses there just to show you so it's still this last direction plt dot show but what we're showing is a table instead of a graph and you see how it looks now you could always do both so you know that would be that would always be something you could do you do both table on table on the graph but who knows maybe you want one or the other and it as this is leading to data science this is like an introduction there's some things you can do to generate a table values or things like that but as you get into you know in the next math course and then certainly when we get into the stats course we're going to look at like all different ways to make tables so this is just one way and you can we'll see even more ways but there we go so y equals 2x there we go and you could always make this quadratic or whatever you'd like it to be again just for simplicity to illustrate the table itself i wanted to keep it we'll just call it y equals 3x plus 2 and where do i need to put this well this is just because i wanted to display the correct thing so that's going to be the title and here i this is where i'm going to take it and a is my x value so it would be three times a plus two there we go and we run it it you know and zero zero five ah now zero zero actually should because since this is plus two now one of the things you can do is you could keep this and then start the range at zero and remember for the range at zero you don't need to put anything if that that would start at zero or you could just say oh i know what this initial value is going to be let me just put that here so you know a couple different options there so there we go so there we go we have our table okay so different ways to display and i just wanted to you know have a nice an interesting uh mini project here so we have the quadratics and we're talking about projectiles so we could have you know we could we could you could make a projectile game um so what this would be is remember knowing where you're you're starting from you could uh randomize the height and location of a wall and you have a toy rocket that must clear the wall so you can you know the game would be determined what initial velocity would get the rocket over the wall and you could take it even further that bonus animation path or you could you know there's some other things you could do so i left this here for you to write but i'm going to show you here's one thing you know one one way to do this so we imported all this stuff and actually a lot of the things i took from uh one of the earlier steps where you're graphing a projectile so i took a lot of things from there and i'm also going to import random and import math so here i just now i i made this a modification so this is the what it will print out it just has to land so many meters away so you could um randomize also like h for the height of the wall i just made it the location of like a finish line so here's this random integer between one and a hundred and then it's going to print that a toy rocket has to land this many meters away and then we'll go through so here we go um so input initial velocity and instead of it it's zero zero it could i just put it made c1 it you know just because but it really could be zero and then same things we want to represent the vertex here and the x min what i would do is x max now i just made this 200 because i know that the wall is going to be you know anywhere between there and 100 and you know i just left it as that so and the y maximum i left it so that you could see where the projectile goes but we could always go back to what we were doing before and copy the y minimum and y maximum the same thing where we get this that where we get x min x max we could always copy we could always copy these because that's what we want to do here we want to put these in and that was that was the idea i want you to you know make use of code you already have that's these these later steps that's really what what it is i want you to make use of code you already have and then maybe modify it a little bit there we go we could have now this would be fine because wherever that wall ends up being or the the finish line this is still gonna it will still print everything and that'll be fine there you go path to the projectile and then here we have the lot the line for the distance and i'll just make it a red line and so notice i just have i just have it go all the way up to the top here location my two x values and then from zero up to y maximum so that's just going to be a line if you wanted to also make it a wall so you could make you know h equals and we'll do the same random integer where do i want this to be i want this to be i don't want um a hundred's probably plenty you could even make it a thousand um you'd be surprised you know these rockets um um has to uh uh clear a wall so many meters away and there we go so if h would be the height and then down here the height of the wall would just be h so that's the slight thing in looking at this a lot of times the wall the scale of us the wall end up being so tiny but it's fine we'll uh we'll keep that there so there we go so the line and plot the parabola now notice i have the roots and i pick just one of them and as it turns out because of the way you know a is negative the the negative b minus is the root that we want that's the one that's going to for the for our purposes here that's the one that's going to be greater than the parabola so notice you you could you know copy the quadratic formula again and the way it displayed i wanted to round this one so round to two decimal places so here we have if root two is greater than or equal to location i wanted to print out the distance i wanted to print out the distance and then tell you success and if not missed it by that much here we go all right so this is it there is actually no test for this but you could see so here we go a rocket has to clear a wall 85 meters away initial velocity and you could say oh okay my initial velocity 300 and then we see that initial velocity is 385 meters away and you see then we're still we didn't clear it so missed it by that much and you can run it again now other things you can do with this so 19 meters away i'm still going to just really increase the velocity of 250 let's make sure we clear it you see and we see the wall here and oh boy yes we did clear it now some of the other things you can do is you could take this even further and knowing that distance take that as your x value of your vertex and you could write a formula that would always make a parabola that perfectly that perfectly clears this this wall that'd be pretty interesting or you could modify this game to say that it has to actually get to a certain distance um not necessarily that distance or more but maybe you say all right you have to hit a target that's exactly 50 meters away and you don't want to miss so that would be an interesting thing because then you could you could actually write the code and i'll leave that to you as you know as for something as for something you could write the code to calculate the projectile that will land exactly at that spot so there we go now for this you know upward motion one of the ways you could take half of that you know whatever the distance half of that and then that's your x value um of the of the vertex and you can use that to calculate you can you can use that to calculate some formulas and as i said we'll get even better formulas as we get into pre-calc because we will do things to adjust the angle and such to get it to be exactly a distance but there you go so so showing you how to make a projectile game i think it's pretty interesting you know the you know that you could and you could even make it you know like loop through this and you know you have to how many ones do you get correct but there you go the projectile game now continuing on this the this is going to be more like the open-ended part all the things that we've been doing you you should put this together in a function that will graph or that will graph or display a table solve a system of equations now if you've been working through everything else in this course you might have some of this already put together and that's where this uh the certification project here is you know hopefully you've built up to this so you know you get to this point you're like okay i know how to do this and i have some of this stuff in place so they kind of just put it together to organize it use some of the code that you've already made you know you want to have all these different functions because then you get to the certification project too and you're going to uh display you know this is what you want to do build the calculator that does this display the graph and a table for any y equals input cool and you can make that prompt for input or something just very clear in the code that you know here's where the equation is solve a system of equations without graphing graph two equations and plot the point of intersection so there we go that's going to be pretty big you know graphing the two solving and graphing and given a b and c plot the roots in the vertex so that'd be some things you know we've been doing some things with linear equations do some things with quadratics enter a b and c see the graph plot as well as the roots in the vertex maybe also print them out you know solving and graphing systems of equations showing the table and then you have you know these projectile games you have the projectile game you have the scatter plot game you can even modify that scatter plot game and make it you know something else that might be interesting so there you go so you have the things you've been working on you put it all together to build this graphing calculator and that's going to be the certification project and by now you're even deeper you know what you're doing in algebra and we're about to then have some more twists and see some more complicated equations some more we can do with this all right so what do we mean by parent graphs and we'd have heard this in code the parent or child that the child graphs have everything that the parent graphs have plus some other additions and so these paragraphs are the basic patterns that other graphs then add to or change so let's take a look at this the one the most basic would be y equals some constant which i'll just call c here and so that would be this blue line here just a flat line no slope you know like y equals three or y equals four or something like that it could even be negative but that's it nothing else and whatever the constant is it's always going to be the same so that's why we call it a parent graph and whatever the constant is that graph's going to have that same look you know flat no slope you know nothing else going on just y equals some number and that's why it's a parent graph because that's like the basic pattern now we were talking about things like y equals mx plus b well the paragraph for that is y equals x just y equals x so notice b is zero and just that basic it's not y equals a constant because there is a slope to it but right the paragraph is just y equals x and then we can get like y equals you know two x plus one or anything like that we can have other things so this wouldn't add anything this could add two things you know i have a slope or i could have a different intercept you know so there we go this so that's the parent graph another one i wanted to show here because i think the drawing of this works better than somehow sometimes how it plays out with python but this is the floor function and so it's this step function some people call it step function floor function greatest integer but the floor is when you're not rounding you're just dropping the decimals even if it's 0.9 doesn't matter we're just dropping all the decimals so it's the same value so here all these decimals it's zero until i get to one now it's one and then 1.1 1.2 it's all the same until i get to two so that's it there there are no in between points here it's just that integer and then at the next integer it jumps up so again that's a parent function and the floor function the ceiling function where no matter what it is i go up to the next number or the round function they're all very similar looking graphs just shifted a little bit so that's why that's again a parent graph we talked about x squared as a parabola and i didn't worry about drawing the even the axes for these because i want to get the idea of this general shape and then x to the third it's kind of like half this parabola bends down now the reason why i just have these is because as you get into like x to the fourth x to the fifth all the even exponents if it's just the parent graph look more like this all the odd ones look more like this but then if i have other things going on in that graph so remember x squared could have ax squared plus bx plus c now if i had other things going on it's still a parabola but it's a little bit different shape parabola maybe it's like a little bit narrower a little bit wider or it moved somewhere else but it will still be a parabola the x to the third if i end up with x to the third plus other things in there then that those curves get a little bit deeper or you know that's you know again paragraph and then beyond that we get some other things and we'll take a look at some of this in the code too and the same with if i had x to the fourth so x to the fourth is going to look more like this maybe a little flattened in the middle but if i had x to the fourth plus a bunch of other things in there you know plus three x squared something else times x you know all these other things that could have three turnarounds at the most you know x to the fourth could turn around one two three times and you know might not be always perfectly symmetrical but if all the if all the exponents are even then it actually would be symmetrical kind of cool it works out that way so these other graphs we have the paragraph but then we could have other things going on and i didn't want to draw a lot of this here because i want to talk mostly about it when we get to the code because that way we can see the graph and the way python displays the graph is going to be much better than my drawing we get the sense of the parent graphs these are the basic patterns the simplest pattern of that type of graph and then we can look at what what else we can change or add to to each function and then how that affects the graph so let's take a look at the code so here we're going to look at all the parent graphs and the code to create them and they're all going to start out with the same setup we've had so far for setting up any plot mat plot library numpy set up our dimensions our points set up the graph so this simplest one is a just a constant y equals five or if y equaled any constant number notice x is not even in there just y always equals five so when i plot this in the same way that i'm plotting the x-axis i'm just going to have this plot minimum from the minimum to the maximum and then y is just always going to be five in this case i'm going to make it a red line and that's what it looks like it's a flat line there's no slope because i don't have that whole part of the equation no x value and y is just always five and it would be the same if y equals you know seven point five or y equals two or you know anything flat line no slope no slope so that's a constant graph and then the linear graphs we were talking about linear graphs but this is the simplest linear graph y equals x so anything else i do with that you know at have a slope in this case it's y equals one x so the slope is one plus zero so the y intercept is zero so again the simplest and then anything else i do that is an offshoot of this parent graph so there's our simplest and notice everything else i do to set this up and how do i plot it my x value and then the y value is x so there we go x x and there's my y equals x graph the slope is one and it just goes on the diagonal like this there we go so every point here you know three three four four five five etc so the quadratics we were looking at quadratics this is this basic quadratic graph y equals x squared so before i do anything else to it that's just enough to make it a parabola and here we're plotting this my x values and then the y value is x squared and there we go so our parabola so in this case you know x squared so a is one b is zero c is zero that's all we have and then any other thing we do to the x squared you know add other things x squared plus you know uh three x plus four or something like that or some you know whatever else we would have is uh an offshoot of this paragraph so there we go and i can make it negative and change that and we see the negative a flips it upside down so we have you know negative like a frown positive like a smile so i'll go back to the smile there we go again the basic paragraph x squared x squared and then a cubic graph y equals x to the third so the quadratic is x squared because it's like the area of a square if i know the sides the cubic x to the third because it's like the volume of a cube if i know the sides so setting up the graph here and uh the comment we'll talk about later just starting out with the basic x to the third and we see the graph looks like this so some you know some of these you know i could sketch it out enough to show you but we see it kind of looks like a parabola with the left side flipped down but not exactly and this is the simplest cubic graph so what i wanted to show you is also supposing we have supposing i just have other things so plot the x values and supposing i had like x to the third minus two x squared minus three x plus four you see i can have all these other things going on in the graph and this is how it affects the cubic graph you see it gets these deeper turns that were just kind of flattened out before but x to the third is going to turn around at the most twice so there we go we see these possibilities here all right so again you know now this is not a parent graph this is you know a more complex graph the parent graph still is x to the third so we're going to so we go x to the fourth and yes they have a name too quartic so x to the fourth and all of our even exponents so we see i'm just plotting x to the fourth all the even exponents look a lot like this so x to the fourth if i also had like x to the sixth notice how it's similar and i probably need more points to make this look smoother but you get the idea now this this is where it gets beyond what i can graphs what i can draw so i like showing showing up with the code but all these even exponent graphs uh we might be able to do x to the eighth and it a lot look horrible that looks kind of horrible so x to the fourth is probably the last good one other than that then we have to change you know how many points we're doing to really make it a lot smoother but that's where it kind of looks like a problem it just flattens out more around zero and all of the even exponent parent graphs will look like this and i also could have x to the fourth plus other things and then the graph would look totally different that could go up and down as many as three times i could have as many as three turnarounds and quintic you thought we were going to run out of names but nope x to the fifth we have a name for that quintic all right so x to the fifth and when we look at this there we go x to the fifth looks a lot like x to the third so all the odd exponent graphs are going to look a lot like this but again just a little bit more flattened out and if it's just this if i have x to the fifth plus other things then the graph could be all all over and it could turn around as many as four times but there we go so all the even graphs are like x to the second or fourth it's symmetrical about the y-axis and kind of looks like a flattened parabola all the odd graphs look like this x to the third the fifth all the odd numbers look like this you know and it would go back and forth and then with you know as they get more complex with other things going on you know you're getting beyond the parent graphs then we have all they can actually have the ups and downs so the absolute value graphs and there's a lot of patterns with absolute value graphs that are also the same as they would be for x squared graphs the way the vertex can move around so the simplest absolute value graph is just this absolute value of x but like the other graphs i could be multiplying by something here inside the absolute value or outside i can add or subtract something so this is how i would write absolute value with the two vertical lines here next to it not parentheses and here's how i would put this in code abs and notice i don't actually need to import anything that's part of the core python library so that's the absolute value of x so as i plot it then it looks like this because absolute value means it's just the number like positive or negative doesn't matter it's just the number so it would be like plotting y equals x and that would be in the positive direction but y equals negative x so for all these negative x values the y value is positive because it's absolute value so that's why instead of continuing down like the y equals x graph it comes to a point and makes a v so there we go so just like x squared whatever x is it's going to end up being positive when you square it absolute value just makes it all it just doesn't do anything except make it positive and so that's why there's there's similar patterns to some of these but there you go perfectly straight lines come to a point that's the absolute value graph and then i can have square root graphs there we go so here's how i write the square root if i was writing it out and if i'm plotting it i'm going to use this now there's math dot square root and there you know and other ways to get a square root but i'm going to use numpy dot square root because we're already using the numpy library for everything else so since i'm already using numpy for everything else that i'm graphing i definitely want to use np dot square root so the the comment we'll talk about in a second but here's the basic square root graph and we can start talking a little bit about inverse functions because this is the inverse of x squared and that's why i also included this that if i uncomment that and now run it you see now just the square root it's just going to be positive because if i include the negative part then that's not a function these x values have two possible y values but when i put them together i see that it looks like a parabola on its side and that's really what it is that's the inverse of x squared because i want to do the opposite i square root things so yeah that just helps us see it but the full graph the true square root graph is this because then it's still a function all these x values have one y value and then there is just no y value beyond here beyond this all right so there we go so there's the square root graph and another way to do this is with a rational exponent now overall for this graphing python does not like rational exponents so i'm going to do this here and i'm going to show you that this actually did work x to the one half exponent but if you try this for any pretty much any other fraction instead of one half it's just not going to work it's just going to give you an error python doesn't like it but there you go that's the same that same graph so x to the one half in solving it if you weren't graphing it you know it works out nicely the denominator is your root so square root denominators so square root denominators two or if i had a cube root the denominator is three so i'm going to write it like this here x to the one third so that's the cube root of x so it's what number times itself three times gets me x so like the cube root of eight would be two because two times two times two is eight so we're getting the cube root and i don't need to worry about the rational exponent here because numpy just like there's a square root there's a cube root also cbrt so that gets the cube root and this one i can have negative values because if the factor shows up three times i can have negative negative negative so that works so there we go i can get the cube root of x there we go so somewhere around here i have when x is eight y is one you know there we go and then we get the cube root so the all these parent graphs just like the other ones i could have other things going on in this equation the cube root of x plus something that would shift it up you know i can move it around but you know these are the basic paragraphs these types of shapes and then other graphs are just you know versions of these all right so the floor function now there's the floor notice it kind of looks like absolute value but the it does have feet at the bottom that go underneath kind of like an l and a backwards l to show you the floor the uh other function that's similar that's the ceiling function and the floor function is the one where you drop all the decimals so it doesn't matter if it's like 5.9 and it doesn't round you just drop it and the answer is five the floor function just drops the decimals and just takes the whole number other times people call it the greatest integer function or the integer part function same idea there's also the ceiling function which no matter what the decimal goes up to the next one and we have round they all work very similar so we have all these and to plot the floor function now i want to show you this this is actually the function np.floor but there's a reason why i didn't do that first because i put all this in in a loop to graph this as a bunch of points because i feel like this illustrates the floor function a lot better it does give these steps and sometimes on the graph people look call it a step function so it's the same value until you get to the next integer then it jumps up and it's that same value until you get to the next integer so all these are just sudden jumps once it gets to the next integer and it's the same value doesn't change because if it was 3.1 the floor is 3 if it was 3.5 the floor is 3 it's 3.6 you know all those values if the floor is 3 and then when it gets to 4 boom then it jumps up so the the reason why i went through all of that is that the actual floor function i feel like doesn't display well but i'll show you you see it gives these values but these vertical lines really shouldn't exist because it's not continuous like that and so it's just what you know numpy just wants to connect it but that's what the floor function looks like in numpy but truly mathematically that's not what it looks like so that's why i wanted to do the loop and show you so there we go so that's the floor function exponential functions so now we go from things like x squared to x is the on is the exponent so what happens when the base doesn't change but then the exponent changes so that's two to the first to the second to the third well we can right away see that that value is going to get really big really quickly and so here to the exponent of x so we have we see it gets really big really quickly and then when we think about our exponent rules when x is zero anything to the zero is one so so all these exponential functions cross the y-axis at zero one and then for negative exponents that flips it to the denominator so two to the negative first is one half to the negative second is negative is one fourth and so the negative exponents for negative x values just really get smaller and smaller so it has that curve but it's not at all parabola on the left here that just gets smaller and smaller but actually it will never touch zero if you get on something where you can keep zooming in you'll see that it just gets smaller and smaller but never touches zero and then over on the right it just has that upward curve and as steep as it looks it actually is never perfectly vertical it's just really steep and so that's the look of all the exponential functions we use this a lot of times in percent increase compound interest things like that but there we go that's a lot of the exponential functions here all right so there we go so these are all the key parent graphs all the other graphs you're going to look at in algebra are going to be some version of these graphs oh it's like this graph but then with some some other things that we that we added uh later on when we get into or another course in trigonometry the trig graphs are different and one of the big differences is they keep repeating these are all you know they do one thing and then that's it but we'll get to those graphs but for anything in algebra these are all the parent graphs so when you look at a graph and you want to figure out well what could the equation be that generated that graph you you say well which parent graph does it look like oh it looks like this so it could be you know an exponential oh it has that other sort of curve it could be a different one so you know that's why you want to get a sense of the parent graphs it helps you develop equations to fit different curves later on and we'll get into some of that stuff okay so there we go and you will have this as a resource too to consult as you know take a look at the different parent graphs now that we've worked through the core skills in this unit let's look through some extra problems and i'm going to work through extra problems using the colab notebook so you can see how you can apply these resources that you're building and use that use these to use these to solve problems that might come up in a textbook or in day-to-day life so we're going to go through some more extra problems here so now that we see these parent graphs let's let's do a little twist here let's look at the these sliders we can add to modify the parent graphs because that's it that they're meant to be modified so that first one y equals a or any you know value value just it's that horizontal line if we add a slider now notice the setup for the slider that you know we're going to import this in line and it's a widget for the slider and then all of our graphing is going to be in this function that we redefine here define and i called it the function f because i wanted a shorter function name f of and then it's going to take a for the slider and in this case we're going to also also going to zoom so all these values are based on the zoom slider so you can zoom in and out and we still have these points but just all the graphing happens here within the function set the plot and notice all this same thing but the zoom then would affect all this and so mathematically you know if i if i wasn't writing code i would just write you know y equals a but we're going to put it here i'm going to have two y values because just this perfectly horizontal line we kind of have to do it this way and we're going to plot this horizontal line just like we did with each axis you know the x values x min x max and then the y values y one and y two which are both the same which is whatever this a value is so here's the slider you know run this function f a goes from negative nine to nine and then the zoom so when we run this so there we go and as i increase the slider so we see our general graph and i can zoom in a little bit but that's what we get like y equals some constant and then i see the slider that parent graph it's still the same look that horizontal line it's just that from the parent graph to the child graph it just it just changes where it is see but then you know the slider and then the zoom that becomes even more interesting when i have our classic slope intercept form so now i have y equals mx plus b what happens when i use sliders and i'm going to change m b and i'm you know i like the zoom in there so i'll just keep that in there so we have everything for the zoom now here and these next few we can do the normal you know numpy linspace and that's the array that i want to graph for my x values so here i have y equals mx plus b so look at that m and b are still variables here because that slider is going to affect it and then that function is going to take that input so now i can have a slider change the m value change the b and i still have the zoom and then this is what i have so it's right here because the slope is zero but what happens as soon as i make the slope one now i start to see my graph and i can see the slope and then as b increases we can see it the y intercept moves up and down there we go and some of these you know now we have some more that we can see when we zoom in there we go and this particular one i didn't put the grid on there but just to show you that as that parent graph y equals x you know that's really just that's the paragraph y equals x because it does have a slope but then i can change the slider and see the negative values and from that paragraph changing these two values makes it its own graph but it still is that linear equation because that's the parent graph still has those core features but then we modify it a little bit i can change the slope i can change the slope i can change where it crosses the x-axis and sliders are a good way to illustrate this so we have now three variables for our quadratic ax squared plus bx plus c and so my function i'll take a b and c and zoom in so then my y value is just this standard quadratic i remember x squared is the parent graph you know a is one and then just x squared that would be the parent graph the simplest quadratic it's a parabola but then when i have these three it still has that core feature of the paragraph it's still parabola but then i change and we can see what a b and c do to these so we have this interactive i'm going to adjust a b and c and as well as the zoom and so we see it defaults to right in the middle so let's just put a now that's one but we can use these sliders to see what does what happens to the graph when a increases you see it gets narrower and then what happens zero it's not a parabola anymore but then as it's negative it flips it down there we go so we can see how these affect you know we'll bring it back up to positive like a smile then we can take a look at well i'll jump to c next because that's the easiest it just same shape it just moves it up or if c became negative same shape and it moves it down and see each time i move this the it runs the function again and then recalibrates it with these new values and then b i think is one of the most interesting because i move it as b increases it dips down to the left kind of interesting and then i can bring it back and then as b decreases it dips down to the right it dips down to the right so just some interesting things that you know so this would be a b and c so this would be x squared minus 5x minus 5 that'd be the equation here or then x squared minus 5x minus 6 and we can zoom in and see you know i i didn't put the values on here so so exactly but you could always do that too so we see these sliders now the reason why i like this and i want you to notice with absolute value how similar those patterns are to the x squared the absolute value because remember whatever x is if you square it it's positive absolute value also then just makes it positive but the core absolute value function so you see absolute value but i'm taking in three different values here from my absolute value parent graph i still have three sliders why because i have a times the absolute value and then inside the absolute value i could have x minus b that's where the b shows up and that shifts it left or right and then plus c shifts it up or down so we see that plus c shifting it up or down and let's take a look at these so again a is zero i've got nothing as soon as i change it now i have my absolute value and of course the big difference is this is linear each line is linear but then it comes to a point because again positive x values were negative the absolute value makes it positive so we see some of those similar patterns though as a increases a times the absolute value this gets narrower just like it did with the parabola and c keeps the same shape but just moves it directly up or moves it down and we have b this is this just moves it exactly side to side so that's you know this is where unlike the parabola there's no other deeper curve to it it just moves it exactly side to side so there we go and even if c you know c was more it's still it still moves it side to side it still moves it side to side so b is negative eight so the if we see the zoom here so if b was negative eight then we see that that is the x value value so it's at negative eight and then because it's b it's x minus b is the is the formula so b is negative eight then that means that's x plus b negative negative makes it a positive that's x plus b in the inside the absolute value so negative eight and then c is three then we go up three so we can see again you know where is that point and we see the basic absolute value and then what each of these things do and how it's very similar to the quadratic but that has its own its own things and we can do this you know those are the most useful i feel like for a lot of algebra you know more commonly useful but square root functions can have a slider too and this one it gives a runtime warning which i just left in there and it still ran because the you can't take the square root of a negative number so you know i still have all these different zoom values that i could you know at some point i get a negative number and it just does not compute it won't show up but it actually that doesn't break this it will give me the error but then that's it so here if i take a look at b and i make b zero here if we run this again so again everything zeroes out where is it but if a is anything there we go and we can zoom in a little bit see this curve a little bit better there we go so if a is anything and then we see b it moves it but remember it's because like the other one x minus b is the formula so when b increases it's really x minus three moves it three to the right and then c also you know moves it up and again we're looking at that point where this starts where that square root function starts whereas if b was zero and c was zero you see that's where we start at the origin zero zero so we see you know your basic square root graph and again you have these different values you can have a times the square root and then square root of what x minus b and then i still have plus c outside that can shift it up or down so we see from the basic parent graphs all these key things and we start hopefully you're starting to see the patterns of how this comes up and you can have these sliders with all different so if we have x to the third now all four sliders and we can see you know x to the third now for this one i just left it as this to show this is what happens you know a increases this you know can make it a little bit narrower but b is even zero c is negative d is even zero across is it zero zero but i just set up you know that's where you get you know some deeper dips in your x to the third functions here so and it's usually some mix of positive and negative coefficients that give you these deeper dips and you can do the same thing x to the fourth and you can have five sliders because x to the fourth would also have a times x to the fourth and then b times x to the third c times x squared d times x to the first and then the constant e which actually would be times x to the zero so there we go and having these you know we can adjust these they're not x these are not always symmetrical but i picked one that actually could make it symmetrical and what that is is notice where the zeros are because x to the fourth a is the coefficient i made that two x to the third b is the coefficient i made that zero x squared c is the coefficient negative six and then x to the first i mean that zero it's symmetrical because all of the even exponents have coefficients and the odd exponents zero out so these even functions happen only if i have all even exponents and notice i can have an e value because e is x to the zero and we'll count that as even so there we go so some things you can see when we have sliders you know same thing with this floor function this is just kind of cool and so what i did here is i you know still with the zoom but i made this floor function i did this to make these a bunch of dots because i like how that displays the floor floor function that's really like this is really the floor function and i made these dots you know to plot the points instead of lines and you know they're big enough that they connect you don't see spaces between but that's really this is really the floor function as we as we know it and we see that you know if a increases it just gets steeper and a could be negative and it could be like that but it still has that step look to it so and then c it's almost i guess it's noticeable there you go but that's it so this is the floor function we have the different steps and you see we still can have that's the parent function just the floor function but then and the floor the general parent function would be yes i would have a times this so i keep that as one and then you know nothing else going on that would be the parent function and then we can adjust things so all these you know that taking it beyond the parent functions you can have sliders and you know all kinds of other things for you know there we go some some other functions we can have all right oh this was the uh exponential function we'll end it on this here that if i have this so i still have my a coefficient and then b to the exponent of something cx minus d now nothing going on because a is zero but if a is at least one but still nothing going on because i have uh b has to be a value it has to be one won't do it it has to be greater than one it has to be greater than one and then c it's c times x this won't do it because that would make the exponent zero out so again it would be a constant that has to be at least something and there we go we can zoom in a little bit a little bit there we go and you know d that could shift it and e could shift it up just like we were doing before but you see these there's a few of these that needed to be non-zero to make this show something so we see you know again general parent graph of our exponential function and all the things we can do to shift it so applying some of the formulas we've been talking about in algebra we can use these for business applications like demand and revenue so demand would be how many would i be able to sell so imagine if we're selling laptop computers and and i find out that you know an average price of like six hundred dollars will get me you know i might sell like 84 million computers so we do some research we find that you know this might be the case and then maybe i find some some particular companies might say oh well you know what our average price is going to be triple it's going to be somewhere right in the neighborhood of 1800 hundred dollars but then maybe they'll only sell like eight million and then we look at this and we say okay well what should my price point be and we can find this we can use these two as you know an x value for you know uh price and y value for how many sold and we can do the slope formula and we can get an equation here to estimate this as being linear and i can take a look at what the demand might be so i could do the slope you know 84 minus 8 over 600 minus 1800 so remember our slope formula from earlier and so there we go so if we have 76 over and then the the denominator happens to be negative negative 1200 and i would get that into an exact decimal that would be my slope and you know some it's going to be something like negative 0.06 so then i could get that into a y equals equation you know um you know somewhere around there negative you know 0.06 x plus and i could have the you know what would be my y intercept i could i could go through that same formula and when we get into the code i'll show you that we can just bring in these formulas that we already know getting a couple points getting our slope intercept form and then i would have that value here um there we go and yeah it's probably you know i'm gonna just rough estimate here so let's let's just say that that would be it and then that would be notice a negative slope because as the price gets higher you know we would graph this as you know price and you know number sold and we would see that as the price gets higher then the number sold would be you know less and less and at some point actually the why are some somewhere more like 50 and at some point you know we the price would be so high that nobody would want it but we would get that as the general estimate now let's just say that's the equation here now what so that would be the demand equation and a lot of times economists are looking for that you know um um business owners too what would be my ideal price point well then if i use that how what can i do to figure out my revenue well my revenue how many sold would be the demand but then the price as i was saying is defined as the x value so at every point i would get that the x value that the revenue is going to be the price times the demand the demand and in this case that price is always going to be x and if i figure this out then it's x times negative 0.06 x plus 50 and you see that would be my y value that i could that i could graph quick distributive property we recognize that this is a quadratic with a negative a value so that means it's going to open down you know plus 50x and so when we look at this then if i have you know the price but then instead of the number sold i want to have revenue so of course if the price is zero i have no revenue and then of course there's some other price that is so high that nobody buys it so i have no revenue and the shape of this graph is going to be a parabola that opens down so then i see that this is going to be a parabola that opens down so then i see that there is some middle price that would maximize revenue and that's kind of the thing that we want to look for you know using these formulas we're using the slope formulas we're using the formulas we've developed to generate a slope intercept equation this would always be true revenue is price times demand so then we can use that to develop this quadratic and we can graph these we can find out what these what these revenue points would be so pretty interesting then we could also apply this to profit so this is just revenue and then we could do this and then subtract subtract the total cost we could get profit so this is really some of the applications that we want to get to that you know using these formulas and determining based on some data you know what should my price point be to maximize my revenue or given you know if i already established a price point what would you know can i predict the revenue you know these are things people put in their business plans so we see these examples that are this one example and i when we look at the code i have two other examples so we can see how this would come together that you you know you can use your math skills you can use your python skills to make some business predictions and these are some of the good applications of of all this math and writing code so let's take a look at the code all right so i wanted to give you an another example or two to show how you can write code to work with these formulas and for this example i'm just saying we're selling t-shirts and i've made up these numbers hopefully they seem kind of realistic but you could define the price here and so these are all variables here so if we define the price and in this case we're going to say we're selling t-shirts for five dollars each and then we have the demand as our next variable and we're saying that if you were giving away t-shirts maybe you could give away 50 you know this is business you're not really not really going to give them away but then your demand decreases as the price increases so every time the price increases increases now in this case again if the price if it was free you'd give away 50 right here the price is five and then so two times the price is 10 so then the demand would be 40 but you see how it just cascades we just define the price and then we use that to talk about demand and then revenue is going to be price times demand now that is actually a go standard formula the price you're selling it four times how many you sold so you see we can do this we've you know once we've defined these then we have these other formulas that they can depend on them and then the total cost so this is another one that you would have to know and i just uh made it so i said four times the demand so if we have four you know the idea is that let's say it cost four dollars to make each t-shirt all right and i'm sure sometimes t-shirts cost less but i just said four dollars so that's where the total cost would be four dollars times you know however many we sold and then that's the total cost so then we have profit is revenue minus total cost makes sense what's the rev how much money do we bring in minus the cost and how you see how we have all these we can just define these formulas now this is a standard formula for for profit revenue minus cost and this is a standard formula for revenue price times demand and some of these then we could develop these equations if we knew if we had some other data so if you're making things to sell you would definitely have this information how much does it cost to make but there you go all these then if you define the price and some demand equation we can calculate all these and we would output you know given this price the demand and revenue because five times forty and then the total cost we 160 you make a profit of forty dollars and then having these this is where people can do some research and they can test things out oh well let's say supposing i decided to make the price ten dollars instead and we take a look at this the price increases the demand decreases as we expected but the revenue increases and so given that cost we still have a profit of of more than double so the price of each doubled i went from five dollars to ten dollars but the profit more than doubled it more than quadrupled so just interesting things that we can we can see here and how does this happen well it might be it might be helpful to see this on a graph too so we're going to graph these things import matplot library and i'm going to import numpy i'm just going to remind you here that the price is x and the demand is y and then we're going to change it that the demand later is going to be the revenue now this is where if you had data this is where you would have you know if i have at what at a certain price what would the demand be you see and i had in mind here you know that this was you know i don't know something else here you're buying two dollars 46 so it would it might not be t-shirts that might be really low but let's just say you know i don't know bottle of water and you know yes it's ten dollars but maybe you hype it up and tell people it's just this amazing bottle of water and if it's cold or if it's really hot that day and water's cold you know you still might have some demand so something else that you you might have but there we go so we can define these price one and demand one so if it was two dollars then the demand is 46 if it's ten dollars then the demand drops down to 30 as an example if just having some of this data from some other research and we can remember these formulas we did back with linear equations because this is essentially two points price and demand or x and y so i'm going to calculate the slope based on those two points calculate the y intercept and then this becomes a y equals mx plus b equation so pretty cool again again if i have you know some examples of some data that we have that we can we can test so given that equation that's going to be my demand equation and i'm going to go through there we go x min x max now notice this x minimum and y minimum i'm going to make zero because negative numbers for this aren't going to really have any practical meaning i'll make the x maximum 50 and the y maximum 320 there we go the number of points that's all fine so after i define everything here i'm going to do a couple other things i'm going to do the x label is going to be price and then i'm going to give my graph a title so notice both these plt dot x label plt dot title there we go and then for this one line one i'm going to have so for line one here's my demand equation y equals m the demand equals m x plus b and so we figured out m and b up here and so i can use those but i'm going to use x because that's the array of x values that i've defined so we have our demand equation and then i'm going to plot y labeled demand so we see the x label is still going to be price but for this one y label is going to be demand and then we're going to plot x and then the demand i commented this out we'll get to that in a second so here we go so i have my graph and then we see yes if i was giving them away for free i could give away 50 the demand decreases as the price increases so at some point maybe like 25 dollars um you know whatever i'm selling here that started out as two dollars you know maybe it's cds or something you know some people still want those if i have 25 dollars you know nope too expensive nobody wants it and then somewhere in there we have the ideal now it's not always perfectly linear in real life but this is a good estimate so given these supposing i keep that same demand equation and as we were saying before i can build upon that and i can have revenue equals x time demand because as long as i keep that equation it will still use that and then so now i'm going to plot my x value and then revenue as y value and i'm going to change my y label to revenue so we see that we have a way to do this and when i graph this we see that yes of course i'm going to make no revenue if the price is zero and then we said that about 25 i'm going to sell none so i'll make no revenue but this is how the revenue goes and it's really interesting that i can have some you know low prices and i think that that's you know the the best i might sell the most but the revenue actually there's some middle number here that gives me my maximum revenue and you see it looks like now if if i make new revenue at zero and at 25 these parabolas are symmetrical so it's exactly 1250 would be the maximum revenue or if people like round numbers you know 12 or 13 so there we go we can see how we can use all of this and we can see that the you know the reason why revenue would be zero here this is where the demand would be zero so this is probably the more the line two is probably the more valuable one but having given getting some research of given prices demand price demand that if i have a couple values here then i could plot this out and i can plan oh from other prices and demand research that i've heard what should i make my price you know and this this is some of the research that people can do you know you have some new product how can you determine what the price should be all right and there you also then if you're making a business plan you could always then download or export these images you know you've you've written the code you see the graph export the graph as an image to include in your business plan so there we go you know a couple different examples of how we can make use of these you know formulas the graphs and you know generate some graph or some image and some data that we can really use okay so let's apply some of these graphs to some other economic theories and see how you can use python your math to plan predict you know look at trends in economics so we looked at cost revenue profit and if we take on that marginal cost revenue or profit if it's marginal then that's the result when making and selling one more product and for some of our examples we were doing some linear equations and for that the marginal cost revenue is the result of the marginal cost revenue and for that the marginal if cost is linear the marginal cost is going to be the same wherever you are but sometimes we have costs or we saw that definitely we have profits or revenue that are not linear and therefore we have some times when oh this is it makes more sense from a cost revenue profit perspective to make one more and sometimes you know it doesn't sometimes you know oh that one more is only going to get me a tiny bit of profit not worth it and cost sometimes it goes the other way you know setting up everything making one product might be a really high cost but now it's all set up so making two three four a hundred thousand you know might make that worth it you know things like newspapers and book printing and you know there's a big setup for the printer and so the marginal cost to make one wouldn't be worth it now there's definitely you know other methods printers but for a lot of the big printers like a big printers like a newspaper marginal cost it'd be a whole lot for one newspaper but no they're going to print thousands and thousands so the marginal cost after they've printed you know a hundred thousand newspapers printing one more is almost nothing as far as cost so these are the things you know what what's it cost to make one more and you know we might notice that for revenue and profit the same thing and so if we have revenue you know and this kind of a lot of times comes up but you know toward the end of the day people say oh what you know what would it take to make one more sale you know maybe it's a store should i stay open for a lot longer and everybody's tired to make one more sale that might be you know a lot more cost to in a lot of ways for a little bit of revenue not worth it and so they say okay these are the hours and we close so these are some deeper analyses as we get into things beyond linear equations we can do even more than that makes that even more interesting but just to mention that you know as we talk about this the marginal is that at any given point what's the cost revenue or profit to make one more all right and let's look at some other things that impact that supply and demand and here again i'm going to give some simple numbers and make it linear equations the true supply and demand graph it's not going to you know and in real life it's not going to be perfectly linear there might even be a little curve to it but even at that it you know if you get the data it might be you know a little bit of a bumpy line but we have supply and demand and we know these definitions are at supply how much are people making you know what's the supply of whatever i'm looking for and the demand how much will do people want how much are people willing to buy so you know if you're looking at you know a movie the movie theater if you wanted to see it in the theater the supplies there's only so many seats you know only so many showings you know a movie or a play or a concert always so many seats only so many showings so that's this limited supply and then the demand could increase if it's something really good that everybody wants to see so a lot of times we see that you know that affects the price and that's what we're going to look at supply demand and price and we're going to graph supply and demand on the same axis so we'll see some similarities some familiar things here for the graph and i'm going to have two x values as old demand and new demand and i just gave them this complicated variable and i'm going x values as old demand and new demand and i just gave them this complicated variable name so that it reminds you that it's an x value so we have old demand and new demand and yes i notice i made the demand increase and then i have old price and new price so now just looking at that well we'll see this on the graph but the price is also going to be the y value and on the same graph i'm going to have supply old supply and new supply i made that you know two variables each of these as i was mentioning you could potentially get data from a table supply and demand data data you could have one table that has you know a particular price supply demand price and you know make all these numpy notice i did not import numpy for anything i'm just putting a few variables here and you know to illustrate the graph but you could absolutely get that data from a table and you know make each of these numpy arrays and graph them that would be really interesting too and that's something that we'll address later on in the course so given these and then i have a basic graph set up adding a couple labels here i'm going to make the x label quantity just general quantity and the y label price and i have this title which i already graphed but we'll get to that so here's the demand function and i'm going to plot this as a red line just because all right so notice the x and y my old x i'm just making this just like i do it with the axis i'm going to plot you know these two x values and these two y values and make you know make that a red line so so we see this you know i'm not going to even put an equation to it i'm just graphing this linear equation from these points to this point and i'm going to do the same thing for supply as a green line and same thing i'm just going to use this data that i had these numbers that i came up with as an example um and this graph we can take a look at this again it's simplified but it really is the general trend of supply and demand so if i made green supply red demand then we take a look at the x axis is quantity so the green that would be quantity supplied and the red that would be quantity demanded supplied and the red that would be quantity demanded and then on the y axis we have price so graphing them both on price we take a look at this and we see if the price is high then the quantity demanded is going to be low and a lot of times we're used to seeing you know um an independent variable on the x axis and we think cause and effect but this is really correlations so i'm not saying necessarily one causes the other but you know it goes together so uh at the when uh x is let's say one and y is 14 so we look at this this this demand there's very low quantity of demand when the price is high and then as the quantity see we see the quantity increase as the price decreases so that's what happens oh you know what is this oh it's 14 you know $14 no i don't i don't think i want it but as the price gets down lower then maybe you know the demand increases more people would want this now supply wise people making this they have a different incentive they want to make money so when the when the demand is low the and when the price and when the price is low then nobody nobody wants to nobody wants to get into this so you see we have low demand but we also have low when the when the when the price is low here then nobody wants to get into this what you know why would i get into this new business if i'm you know whatever i'm selling is not going to be you know that lucrative but the quantity in the green line the quantity supplied will increase as the price increases and we see that in different industries that you know oh you know why why are people you know getting into this industry oh because they all see they can make money oh this is the hot item oh i can get in on this and somehow you know uh make money so that's what we have that the supply quantity increases as the price increases so there we go so we have these two opposite trends and this is kind of like the core of economics because as you know i get different data this is i just did these numbers as an example but these graphs could shift you know maybe there's some something else that affects this that maybe you know instead of uh the supply increasing like this maybe something causes it to increase a little bit steeper or maybe you know if we say that you know the quantity supplied is low here for this price but maybe you know for whatever we're making that the entry level was even at a higher price and this whole thing shifts so you know that's really what a lot of economists are trying to do and then if this is quantity across the x-axis let's take a look at where these lines intersect and then that would be the point of equilibrium because what we're saying is the quantity here supplied and the quantity demanded would be the same and i mean that's ideal you know you know let's say you have a bakery and you make fresh things every morning and then at the end of the day you have it all sold nothing left over that's great here on the left you know and we'll say let's say that you know for our fictional numbers that happens at six but let's say a little bit before that so it's still to the point that the price is too high so the demand's not really there the price is increasing but not so good yet so the supply is not really there and we still have a gap between demand and supply so here on the left the red line is higher there's more of a demand but not enough of a supply and then we have on the right side of that we have more of a supply but not as much demand and that would be the one this would be on the right that would be the one that's dangerous for anybody supplying whatever product because you know they're getting into this trying to make money the price is starting to get to where somebody's happy oh good the price is going up i'll make more money but then there's you know the demand drops off so now they really have to scramble for customers you know that's trouble or the price here or on the left for the people who want this product the demand is still higher than supply and that's part of what keeps the price higher because the demand is there not as much supply well then the price increases you know things like you know stock trading people argue about this stuff all day anytime somebody wants to too many people want to sell a particular stock oh well then you know the supply increases too many and we go to the right too many people want to sell this you know then other people notice that you're oh you're really trying to get rid of this and then the demand kind of goes down you know what's wrong with it and that affects price and and on the left then we have the price is too high because there's not enough of supply supply and you know that sometimes causes oh there's you know there's not much supply nobody wants to sell that you know this must be good and then that kind of increases the demand and the hype a little bit so you see this one simple graph describes all these complicated trends and we see this that you know our goal all around is you know finding these points of equilibrium supply meets demand you know therefore everybody you know making whatever products are making money people looking for these products are finding them you know and you know fair trade people are paying reasonable prices we're all trying to get to that but we see all these things happen all around there and it's not just one direction of cause and effect it's multiple things going on as well as just general correlations all things happening together so we look at this you know and and let's say we say the trend is like as the price goes down how does how does that affect demand or it goes the other way too as the price goes up how does that affect demand and the word to describe that is elasticity so elasticity is how quickly does uh demand change when price changes and we can look at this there's the formula percent change in demand over percent change in price and this is again all these economic formulas i'm just going to give you a couple of them here that when you have these formulas you can use this you know get data uh use it to graph and then use it to calculate these formulas to answer these questions you know how elastic is that price how elastic is that price because if things change if the price changes and then that really changes demand then we can say it's a very elastic like it like an elastic band or something that bounces that you know it stretches and changes easily or things you know if price changes and it does not change demand you know things like uh gasoline you know we don't like to pay the price goes up we don't like to pay it but if the price went up a little bit i still have to fill my car so that demand would not be very elastic the price could change and the demand doesn't change and you know we can so we can see that if the percent change in price let's say it's it's you know some significant number but then the percent change in demand is like almost nothing we calculate that you know the total value of that fraction is going to be close to zero um and we're going to say that's not very elastic but maybe some other things um you know a concert ticket you know there's ones i've seen where oh i'd like to go see i'd like to go see this but the price is too much no i won't go and as the price goes down oh i heard the price went down that would absolutely change the demand oh too much i i won't go oh the price went down now i want to go and that really changed it you know things that aren't essential and we would say that that would be very elastic so in calculating this and you know down the road you could always combine all these into one thing but i'm just going to show you like just old demand new demand old price new price and we're going to calculate the percent change so remember then that's you know the new price minus the old so there's their difference divided by the old price and it's going to get a decimal that we can convert to a percent so you see again and we want to get in the habit like you you're so familiar with you know colab that oh i have a formula i want to use you know write write a quick program to do it and then now all we have to do is change these values up here and we can calculate everything that we need so price change and that's the ends up being the percent change and then the same thing with demand the new demand minus the old demand and that's the difference divided by the old demand and that gives you a percent it will give you a decimal that you can convert to a percent and so elasticity number is demand change divided by price change so what i have is then it'll just print that number and here's some of the analysis so again different things oh you what you know what's the cutoff point you can always just put these in you know a nice little if statement statement and so if the number is greater than one then i'm going to print the demand is elastic and notice this is you know else if so i just continue this on you know lf the number equals one then it's unitary or proportional so sometimes you know we we do get one that's there you go an increase i think that that proportional increase increases demand but you know and then if it's less than one then that's inelastic that those are all the ones that you know again it the demand hardly changes based on price and i just decided to attack one more and so you see this is how you can you know i i like to when i do my lf statements i like to tag on one more thing at the end you know for whatever reason suppose you know this should capture everything if it's it's either greater than one equals one or less than one i mean it's really but capture one other like grab bag you know what you know if something else happened very often we'll have if and lf without you know exhausting every possibility and then you just easily just put an else there at the end so i have some sample numbers here and then we can click and it would print out so we get this negative 2.2 and then demand is inelastic so as that example and we can do the same thing with supply so remember you know supply changes um as price change because people say oh hey i want to this is a hot industry i want to get into this or then people say oh nope it's uh you know this is cooled off i'm gonna get out um so in uh it you know in the united states kind of recently the real estate market market uh was hot and that's supply like okay not everybody necessarily is going to sell their house or try to be a realtor or try to sell some property but when the prices are so good more people decide to get into it like oh maybe i will sell this you know so that's the idea that if the price is good and people see oh opportunities to make money they get into that so price elasticity of supply answers that question how how responsive is this supply to changes in price so very similar formula percent change in supply over percent change in price and just a few values to sample and very similar formula you know new price minus the old price divided by the old price and uh new supply minus old supply divided by the old supply and we're going to go through the same thing elasticity number and very similar analysis greater than one it's elastic which remember as a fraction greater than one is going to be that this percent change in supply is much greater than the change in price percent change in price and we have to do percent change because if we just do you know actual dollar amounts or actual number of things supplied that really doesn't always give us a good example some things just in general are low cost so a change of a dollar might be a whole lot some things are really high cost like you know a change for a car that a price change of a dollar is not going to be much at all so same thing with supply you know what what's what's the relevance you know how is it relevant to the previous supply so that's why we do the percent change so yeah if price change is you know a certain percent but supply change is a lot more related to that then we're going to say oh wow that's elastic people are noticing these trends and we can go through this and same exact analysis either supplies elastic unitary or any elastic and i just you know just had these so there we go this number and it's inelastic because it's this tiny decimal so yeah not everything you know supply cannot always be you know elastic and so notice you can take this and given the old prices and old supply you could always take these things and combine them with something like this so that therefore you could graph and if you had you know other you know other numbers so notice this i mean even though these numbers might be fictional if you had any bit of research that you just had a few values here you can get these you know and with these you know six things calculate you know the graph and elasticity of supply elasticity of demand and really just get a handle on you know where where you are in this graph and what are the potential changes you know is it you know these graphs i kind of made the linear and it's kind of proportional but you know very often it's going to be bumpier and you know where are you on this graph and what's what's what's going on if you really wanted to you could even um there's other plugins for other uh data especially things like stock prices and you could use this uh to calculate elasticity for various stock prices you could calculate some of the trends um and a lot of these it'll work within colab there's a lot of things that will work within colab that are a lot of things that'll work within your google drive and those particular free tools tend to update things like stock prices maybe like every 15 minutes at the at the most but that's going to be enough to give some sort of analysis you know for an amateur investor take a look at different things you know that's kind of what we want to take this and like these types of formulas and build upon these so that you know you can uh build data pipelines and get information at some reasonably regular level have all the formulas and calculate and say you know okay now you know have this output at some sort of report for you let's see the graph let's see it in real time you know pretty much real time let's run through some formulas and see you know hey i'm thinking about investing in this what's it looking like oh it's it's very you know the demand's very elastic so you know you really have to take notice of the price or oh this you know um i see this trend maybe you know a supply of something that maybe i can get into all these things we want to you know use this information to uh make decisions about what we want to invest in yeah and you can do this all right here in colab and right here in your google drive so uh we'll get in some more some some more math now and you know the next step of our journey so let's talk about calculating interest and usually that's going to be money i put in the bank or in some investment or sometimes it's going to be money that i borrow and then how much extra am i paying so the simple interest formula is exactly that simple and it's good for short term it's good for you know not a lot of money if it's long term but the longer you go with this the less accurate it's going to be and we'll see why that is but for short term principle times rate times time it gives you the interest so if i was borrowing something what you know let's say you know i have borrowed you know a hundred dollars and the rate would be uh 0.05 so the rate's always a percent converted to a decimal so the rate would be five percent and as a decimal it'd be 0.05 and then the time would be always in years so you know let's say i borrowed a hundred dollars for two years then what in what extra interest would i owe on that so there we go that would be another ten dollars so what i would then say is okay well you know given this rate if i needed a hundred dollars now and it's going to take me two years to pay it off you know maybe if it's going to take me two years to pay off a hundred dollars maybe calculating interest isn't my biggest problem but the uh if i if you know i could calculate oh how much extra would that cost me an interest now to figure out the total amount that i would pay i would take that interest and i would add it to the original principle because i have to pay that hundred dollars back plus the extra ten dollars so let's take a look at this you know if time is one like let's say one year and what that is is that's compounding that's the notion of compounding that i'm taking that interest and then i'm adding it to the principle so let's say the time was one year and so so this would be times point zero five times one then the interest would be five dollars and then what am i going to do i'm going to i'm going to add that together so i'm going to say you know the principle plus the interest um is is going to be five dollars now the reason why we compound it is because after let's say a year so then i have that new principle plus the interest but then that new principle plus the interest that's my new amount and then that would then generate another five percent of the interest generate another five percent in interest so you see that becomes my new principle times five percent gives me my new amount of interest and then i'd have to add that so you see i would take that you know times that point oh five there we go and then i take that amount and add it to the new new bit so that could potentially be a lot you know every time i have to calculate the interest add it to the principle again and then recalculate it but let's take a look in terms of algebra what what's really happening here so if i have this the original principle plus the interest and i probably don't even need the parentheses here so the principle plus but remember the interest was principle times rate times time so we're doing a little bit of substitution there so the compounding part principle plus the interest but the interest remember that was this formula so i'll just put that in here and notice if i factor out p so you see the things we were doing before with common factors that comes around again then i factor out p times one plus rt but supposing t is one if t is one then that would be r times one which you know times one i really don't have to write that and then i won't write it in this step so we see a nice algebraic way to write this where i have the original calculating the interest and then also adding it now we're not going to stop there what makes this really useful because that is now my principle calculating the interest for that one year and then now that's my new amount what happens when i have to calculate it for the next year well what did i do to the original principle i did principle is what i started out with and then i did times one plus the rate so if i had to do it again for the next year it would be times one plus the rate again because that's what i did to get the principle plus the interest and then again times one plus the rate and when we think about this in another way it really makes sense because we're seeing really makes sense because we're saying that that principle times one plus the rate is that i'm saying you know this original principle 100 or whatever it is if that rate is five percent you know then that's 1.05 so you know what do i have i have a hundred percent of it plus the extra five percent and then doing that you know that 105 percent every time we can even simplify this that that principle times one plus the rate because if that's what i'm doing every time how can i simple that with an exponent and that's where time comes back in i have that exponent of time because every year then i'm doing that times one plus the rate times one plus the rate and so now we get from simple which is nice principle times rate times time to get just the interest and again good for a short term but you see on long term this is the formula that we want that compound interest because that accounts for every time it goes a little bit bit i earn some interest but then that becomes a part of that new principle and then that's earning some sort of interest and if this was my money in the bank that's great that's good news for me but then if this is money that i'm borrowing then the bank is going to be wanting to do this sort of formula to make sure that they get all the money that they that that they deserve you know and then i have to make sure that i pay that extra interest so that's where we get the principle uh simple and compound interest and then we get to this so then that's the you know that's the formula and then that gives you you know your new amount so there we go a new amount and then when we get to the code we're going to talk about that new amount we're going to call it annuity we're going to call it a maybe as a variable a for amount but then it'll be annuity which is a fancier word for the amount that we end up with so there we go the connection with simple and compound interest and we'll take this a little bit further when we get into the code so let's take a look at that let's take a look at the code so we're looking at simple interest as the well as the name says simple because it's good for short term and for some things that might be good for an estimate but we just get principle times rate times time equals the amount of interest and there we go again short term because we're going to do some other things to it when we get to longer term and that's what we'll get to here so the principle if we just put some example numbers here thousand dollars let's say i borrowed money from the bank a thousand dollars the rate five percent so it's always the percent the annual rate converted to a decimal and then time is always in years so if i borrowed a thousand dollars from the bank they said okay it's five percent interest for three years i'll pay it back here's the formula interest equals prt and when we run it there we go we get a hundred and fifty dollars in interest so i'd pay back that thousand plus the extra interest but right away then that tells me the cost of borrowing that i need it now and i don't have it so that's going to cost me 150 dollars so then i want to find out the total amount well then the new amount is just that principle plus the interest and there we go i'm going to calculate the interest just like we did before and then this new amount is principle plus the interest so there we go and we add that that hundred and fifty plus the thousand makes it eleven fifty so now i have that new amount okay so most of the time we're going to be calculating the interest and then adding it to the new amount it's very rare that i'm paying just the interest or somehow just the amount and not worrying about interest so here's what we were just talking about that new amount is that new amount is principle plus the interest and if it's for one year that's principle plus for one year that would be p times r times t which would be one so that won't change it so that would be the new amount principle plus the interest so some algebra that common factor p if i divide that out i get p times one plus r and if i do the distributive property i get back to this so p times one is is p and p times r is p r now this is going to be very useful that we factored out this p because now i have that new amount just that original p times one plus r and the and the rate is always going to be some decimal that it's going to be pretty easy to add that to one one plus point oh five is one point oh five you can do that in your head it doesn't even feel like a step and then this is what you're going to enter in the calculator so there we go that one step that you automatically would do in your head and you're most likely going to have the calculator for these so that was what you would enter in the calculator p times one plus r now again this is for one year and 50 so if we go back to that original supposing the time was one year just to show you that this works one year that'd be fifty dollars in interest and for one year then then the new amount would be 1050 so that what we're doing there adding the interest to the principal that's compounding and compounding is exactly that adding the interest to the principal and then calculating the percent interest from this new amount so let's look at how this happens over a few years so if my original amount is p so then the next year it's p times one plus r but now that's my new amount so so again the next year so p is the time zero after one year after one year i multiply times one plus r and after another year i multiply times one plus r again and we'll just do this one more and again p after one year after two years after three years so then that's just the same as making this an exponent p times one plus r to the third power because i'm multiplying this factor one plus r three times and now we have compound interest that instead of having to go back and every time calculate the interest simple interest add it and then do it again you know in some loop i have one formula that does the compounding and all i need to do is add the exponent for how many years so now the annuity from the original e times one plus r exponent t so that's 1157 now it's not an error that this is different and remember the original was 1150 when i did this by hand i just you know calculated the interest based on simple interest and then added it but that's after three years that was 1150 and like i said simple interest is good for short term but the longer it goes the less accurate it is so when i have this comp when i'm compounding it every year notice that's every year that i'm adding the interest and then the next year so remember after after one year it was 1050 so then for this for year two i'm getting that five percent interest on not on a thousand but on 1050 and on the next year i get that five percent interest on that new amount so that's the compounding it's like a snowball that rolls down the hill and accumulates more snow and gets bigger and bigger as it goes down that's what we're doing every time we're compounding because i'm still taking that rate five percent of a larger and larger amount so compounded i get 1157 just that same amount over three years i earned an extra seven dollars just because the formula was better so time is always in years and that's compounding every year but we also have a formula supposing compounding happens n times per year so that gives us this more complicated formula but that's okay we see how it connects t times one plus and instead of r we're doing r over n because this is happening n times per year so that rate isn't always an annual rate so i have to divide it by how many times i'm recalculating it but since then every year was the exponent the exponent becomes nt how many times a year times the number of years so then i'm compounding however many times as an example here i put it as 12 because that's pretty common monthly we know recalculate compounding 12 times a year so then one plus r for n what's in these parentheses gets smaller but then the exponents larger and it still ends up working out if this is money now if this is money you're paying back it ends up paying you end up paying more but if this is money you're putting in the bank earning interest then it works out in your benefit so that thousand dollars five percent for three years but now this time compounded 12 times per year i use the extra parentheses for any fraction so there you go instead of just r here it was one plus r over n i put that in parentheses also and you definitely need the parentheses here to make sure that stays because that is the whole exponent nt and remember the python syntax you know in math we might skip the multiplying symbol because we're just they're next to each other but python have to put that asterisk there so there's the annuity the other thing we're going to talk about this instead of just amount that's annuity and principle is the word for the amount we start out with and annuity is the word for the amount we end up with so now the annuity compounded monthly look at that 1161 so we go back from that simple interest that was kind of off to compounded annual 1157 much better to 1161 because we're compounding it monthly and guess what it gets better but first i'm going to start talking about this irrational number e now in the middle of all these very practical money in the bank things that we can understand why am i going to start talking about this irrational number e and yes it's e but it's a number because this is going to come up in the next formula all right so just a quick note about e we're going to import math we're going to import math because e is a weird number and so when i print math dot e this is the number there we go and as a good estimate you can just call it 2.7 but in your calculations you actually want to use this whole number so that's why i want to import math dot e i don't want to just you know say 2.7 and call it good another interesting thing about this it's 2.7 and then we see it's 1828 and then the 1828 repeats again that's kind of interesting but it only does that a couple times and then it just all falls apart so math dot e use that for the irrational number e and it's e because it's euler's number his name began with an e but uh john napier who invented logarithms and other things when he came up with this number he named it e after uh another mathematician that you liked euler so sometimes people call it euler's number but anyway it's e now if we're talking about compounding n times per year we go from being irrational and talking about e to being very rational well what if i just keep compounding it many times and that's where we get to continuous growth so in that previous formula n could be 12 now in this example i made it 100 because we're going to do some things with this uh you know it could be 12 every month 52 every week you know i just made it a nice round number 100 could be 365 as n gets to be a bigger and bigger number then we get the annuity becomes this formula p e to the rt and that's why we we're talking about e so i get this irrational number e and then the exponent is rt because as we get well i'll just demonstrate this so let's say n is 100 and if we do that actually let's even make it 52 so compounding every week and then here i'm going to compare these two formulas so this one i call the variable n times so there's the there's our other formula p times one plus r over n to the nt and then we're going to compare that with our continuous growth p times math dot e exponent rt and then we're going to print it this one or this one one so n times we remember that from before 1161 that should be the same number and then the continuous growth 1161.83 so it's pretty close but it's a little bit more for the 1161.75 1161.83 it's pretty close but the continuous growth gives us even more and if n gets to be a much larger number like a thousand you'll see it gets really close 1161.829 or 1161.834 so we see if we took it to two decimal places they actually round to be the same and that's the idea with continuous growth you see it it's not that it's always going to be more than this it's that as n gets larger it approaches this value so if i have anything that's compounded a lot or other things beyond money in the bank or things like that that i can say are continuous growth applications you know population increase or things like that then i'm going to use this and you know i can call it annuity i can call it the you know the new amount but i'm going to use this formula so it's very useful for anything continuous growth it comes up a lot i mean throughout math and calculus some version of this comes up a lot so i have this kind of formula so i have this continuous growth formula if i want to calculate this all right now for really large amounts the mortgage formula and the mortgage payment formula is if i have a really large amount of money and that's usually a mortgage you know as an example i think this might be you know pretty close to the average mortgage these days 240 000 so that's a large amount of money and then time is 30 years that's a long amount that's a long time so for such a large amount of money over such a long period of time then it actually really makes a difference how like if i'm paying just a little bit you know every month the fact that i'm paying you know a little bit and then that principle reduces just a little then the next month i'm earning interest on that slightly lower principle well that really makes a difference so if we use any of the other formulas to calculate mortgage payments it's going to be a lot more than you know you would expect you'd be like oh my gosh how can i afford that but when we use this more complicated formula this accounts for the fact that we're paying it off gradually and looking at all that then we can take a look at for that given amount of time what would my monthly payment be so that it'll work out nicely you know if i'm paying over 30 years times 12 months that's 360 payments so i can calculate it if i borrowed this amount of money after exactly 360 payments my balance is zero and it works out so just given that i can figure out the payment and then we'll look at you know how that plays out so this being a complicated formula if we want to write code for this and most of the time you're going to you this you don't even usually enter this into your calculator you're going to make a formula that you can plug in the numbers here so that's what we're going to do and here's how i decided to break that down i just took the numerator that r over 12 one plus r over 12 12 t and just that numerator i made it a variable and we see r over 12 times one plus r over 12 to the 12 t all right and they did the same thing with the denominator so just the denominator and i have one plus r over 12 so the exponent 12 t and then minus one separate from that so i have numerator denominator two separate variables so then the payment see i didn't forget about that p for principle there the capital p for principle so i'll talk about the so i'm going to round this because this is going to be a weird number and the first part is p times numerator divided by denominator so there's my mortgage payment so p times numerator divided by denominator and then i'm going to round that because that's going to be a very long decimal i'm going to round that so it takes the first argument and then the second one how many decimal places there we go so when we take a look at this and when we run it mortgage payment 1362 and 69 cents so given that then we know that's the payment that will make this work out that after 360 payments of this so each time you know we're still accruing interest and we're still making a payment and it's going to work out now to see how that plays out we call it the amortization schedule so and that's it that's the mortgage payment schedule and yes all these have the word more in it uh which means death you know kind of like you know what's what's true life you know death and taxes and i guess mortgage but yeah it was very morbid when people first came up with this word but it came up with this word but it stuck we will end this after this with something much more positive so you know don't worry i don't want to leave you in the more morbid state so the mortgage payment schedule if i take this there we go given these three things i just rewrote i just rewrote all this how we're going to calculate the payment all right so i'm going to print this payment just like what i did before so that's all the same as what we just did but the amortization schedule is i want to have a loop to show the interest amounts and we can also do this in a spreadsheet that's pretty common and later on in the course we'll talk about that so i can i'm going to have a loop so i'm going to set this new variable called balance and the starting balance is going to be that original p principle okay then i'm going to print this which is going to be my headings month i'm going to put a tab there balance put a tab and then interest so that's what i want i want the number you know what month am i talking about what's the balance at that point and then what's the interest that i'm paying for that month so here's what we have in my loop for a and range and how many months 12 t okay so the interest is round so again i'm going to round these because calculating these you know it's going to be a lot of weird decimals i want it to be two decimals dollars and cents so the interest that we're going to pay is this is simple interest again because that short term this is only for one month and then we're going to manually compound it here in this loop so i do want simple interest it still has usefulness balance times so that's my p for that month times r and then t is 1 12th so i'm not just going to multiply by one i'm just going to divide by 12 but that's what it is this is the original simple interest prt the balance is the principle for that month rate and then time is 112 so i'm just going to divide by 12 so there we go and all that i'm going to round it to two decimal places so now that i have the interest this will still calculate the interest and i just put this here for the sake of the displaying is that i only want if a is divisible by 24 you see remember the modulus a remain a divided by 24 if the remainder is zero then or if a is 359 which is going to be almost the last month so these are the ones so i'm rather than print out every single month i would just want to skip a few normally if i know if i put this in a spreadsheet i'd want the whole schedule and i'd print out all 360 months but only for these we're going to print out a select few so i want a and then tab so that you know a is going to be what month because that's a in range and then tab balance tab and then interest so there we go that's what's going to line up month balance interest so then after i do this so i put this line last because the first time through i want it to be the current amount and then i'm going to increase the balance so you see what i'm doing to increase the balance here all right i'm going to round balance plus interest minus payment so you see that's what's happening every month so we're manually compounding it the balance at that month plus the interest that accrues that month minus the payment and then round it to two decimal places so when we run this so we have the payment is 1362 just so we figured and then here we have our abbreviated table month balance interest so month zero we start out owing 240 000 as we expected but look at that this is why it makes a difference you're paying 1100 in interest just for that month that's a lot of money and you know that's it it's you know it's almost the whole mortgage payment you know it's shocking at first after you do this enough times you come to terms with it and say yes that's right i'm paying almost all interest at the beginning you know and then 1362 pay 1100 so really then notice that only 262 is going toward the payment now we could see this really increase slightly but at month 24 we've paid down some things but it's probably not as low as you'd expect it to be you'd think like oh i'm paying so much i'd expect this balance to be lower but you see you really just chip away at it and even then you're paying less interest but it's still more than a thousand dollars and that's you know month 24 so after two years and you see after month 48 you're paying a little bit less interest we do see this moving in the right direction you're paying this down and you're paying a little bit less interest but probably not going down as quickly as you'd want and that's why i just wanted to skip ahead you know every two years we check in and see the balance and you know how much interest we're paying you know we take a look at this now you know we take and we look at this so if we have just over 140 so remember we originally borrowed 240 still a 140 but at this point now that difference we start building annuity or start start building equity in in you know if this is a mortgage equity in the house which means the house is worth is worth a lot more than what we owe and so you could borrow money against that you know home equity loans that's where that comes in as you start getting lower and you know the the value of the house is worth a certain amount and then you only owe a certain amount the difference you know you can actually borrow money against that that'll be a discussion for another time so we have this and finally now it's still a lot i mean you know sometimes it's you know to think about wow i'm still you know look at that 20 years in i'm still paying more than five hundred dollars a month just in interest you know it but at least that's only five hundred dollars a month and you know we're getting the vast majority of our payments are going at this point to paying off the mortgage and now when we take a look you know look at that double digits instead of three digits thirty thousand and then the amount of interest at that point is a hundred and forty one dollars so uh i wanted to skip ahead and then just do month 359 because look at that now the balance at that point is just under what the mortgage payment would be and then the interest is this tiny amount and that would be if you know month 360 when you make your last payment it ends up being like four or five dollars more than the normal mortgage payment but then it's done so it works out that that that monthly payment you know using that formula gave us that monthly payment 1362 and 69 cents and that monthly payment did work out that that exact payment as you know we're look at the amortization table at 360 months it was you know it we paid it off and there we go for an extra five dollars the last month i'm not going to stress about that so these are you know interesting things to think about seeing how using these percent interest payments applied to loans how that plays out how you're paying off interest how we're making use of the simple interest and then paying down this balance so this mortgage is the most common but for any large amount of money over a significant amount of time we would use this formula does not have to be a mortgage car payments not always because a lot of times they're a lot lower but if it was a car payment for like particularly expensive car or over that over a longer period of time then we might use this doesn't have to go to 30 years that time can be anything so we see this you know paying off this debt over time so let's use something very similar but let's turn it around and have something positive retirement account estimation now this one instead of owing money you know this p is not money that i'm borrowing it's money that i'm going to put into an account and instead of owing money every month i'm going to contribute and so there's no formula for this that i'm just going to estimate this oh okay let's say 350 just because uh you'll see you'll see how this plays out and i just picked these numbers here so let's say the principle is a thousand and this is just estimation here well let's say you start out with a thousand dollars now this is where the estimation comes in most of the time the retirement account you know any decent fund manager is going to be able to get you point eight percent or eight percent interest so now this is your money growing in an account this isn't you paying off a debt it's your money growing in an account so if you had a thousand dollars and we estimate that it's growing at eight percent per year that's great and i made this time 38 years as you know not entirely random it was i just thought like age 22 till age 60 38 years so you start it put a thousand dollars in this account and then you start saving that you know from that point like you know your whole career you put away 350 every month in this account okay and i'm going to establish this other variable annuity which i'm going to start out the original is p so now here's my loop for the contribution and the percent growth so again 38 years so for a in range 12 t so there you go because every month we're contributing something so notice what we're doing with this annuity we're taking the annuity that we already have plus the monthly contribution and then that's going to grow one plus r over 12 because that's a monthly notice that percent increase formula but this is monthly so the exponent if it was nt the exponent n would be 12 and t would be 112 which cancels out to one so i don't need to write the exponent of one but that's where this comes from it is that same formula r over n to the nt but nt and is n is 12 t is one over 12 and so that cancels out so so each month then if we take this and that's why i wanted to break this down still monthly because i want to allow for this contribution here the annuity plus the monthly contribution we want that to happen each time and then it's going to grow so in this loop now this continues to grow so at the end we're going to print this out and i'm going to go around because that'll end up being a weird decimal annuity okay so now the annuity is going to seem like a lot but this is what we want to break this down if we're if our rate is eight percent so at the end let's say it's still earning eight percent when you start taking what so the annual income from interest you see and so that's annuity times the rate that's it and yeah i'm going to two decimal places but that so if i have this this amount of money that i'm going to eventually get to then the idea is that money now is yours in the bank or in this in this fund somewhere that the annual income is just that percentage rate so when we run it so take a look at this annuity here so one zero six one five nine seven yes that's more than a million dollars and if it continues to earn that eight percent the annual income just from the interest is eighty four thousand dollars or almost eighty five thousand and that's the idea that this money in the bank or in some investment not not in the bank not saving because nothing in the bank is going to get you this eight percent interest that makes this happen but this retirement investment if you're you know you have this and you can contribute something it's you're constantly contributing and it's growing so at some point then you retire and you have this million dollars that earns this amount of interest and i just picked you know 38 years um the earlier you start the better and the later you stop start uh taking money out you know it can grow even more that you could take the money out at you know uh age i just i just rough estimated did age 22 to 60 you know if you if you start as early as you can i mean even 18 and you know till 68 if you look at that that'd be like 50 years that really is what makes a difference because remember this snowball so that eight percent in those later years that's eight percent of larger and larger amounts of money and then if you get it to this million then eight percent of a million is more than 80 000 so that's that's the idea we want to get to this larger amount of money that just the interest on that you know if this investment keeps going just the interest on that is enough to live on and you take the interest and then you're back to this amount which will earn interest the next year so we want to leave you with that that positive idea of how we can use all this you know that's that's what use all all these you know percent increase formulas to you know turn that into money in the bank that's that's the goal here all right and you know hopefully then it works out and if you have these this code you can tinker with this and say you know how much do you start out with you know keep this rate maybe change the rate a little bit oh you know my fund manager is doing really well change the time monthly contribution you can tinker with these and run it and you know see the results so you know prepare for uh you know what you need to do to invest for retirement so let's look at some more ways you can use these mortgage mortgage formulas here now like we were doing before i'm going to define actually the payment formula as its own function so there we go uh def and then payment and i'm going to take the arguments pr t run it through this formula and i'll just return the payment so this you'll see some places we can use this and all of these you know we're going to apply these to you know let's say you know you're looking for a house you're comparing different things so to get this i'm just going to run this and there we go and i don't need to run that again now i have that the formula here so i'm going to do a similar function and i get something different because i just want to show you this one i'm just going to define it pmt and i'm only taking the principle as the argument because i'm going to just give a set rate and time so with this and then i'll run that through taking the input as whatever the principle is i'm going to calculate the payment and the reason why i'm doing this and we see these imports is because i'm going to make this a slider where i'm just going to go from zero to three hundred thousand and see how the payment changes based on that principle of course the slider shows it somewhere in the middle four hundred and fifty thousand the monthly payment would be eight ninety nine thirty three and we can see how this goes up and here's something you can do you know again if you're comparing different mortgages or houses you can see how does this really affect my monthly payment you know and we look at this oh two hundred and twenty one thousand should i buy a house it's more expensive i know my payment will go up but the question is by how much you see and we can look at this now that's great to see these exact numbers but maybe i want to see the trend maybe there's i want to graph it so notice our standard for graphing and in this case i just define my x maximum is three hundred thousand and my y maximum four thousand that's going to be plenty all these standard things you would already have set up you know x min max the points you're going to use for np dot linspace and everything you're going to do to graph something that i don't always put in there plt dot grid just to show the grid lines and axe dot set x label and set y label so the x will be the amount borrowed and we see that that goes from zero to 300 000 and the y will be the monthly payment so now that payment function i defined earlier i can just use that as my y value i only need the x that i'm going to use as a variable here and i'm still going to give it just a consistent rate and time so you know x is the input all these are going to given the same rate and time how does the principal affect the monthly payment and when we run this we can see that the payment change is actually linear given that same rate and time and this would be realistic maybe you get pre-approved from the bank so you you would know your interest rate and you would know the time so just comparing different mortgages it is linear how much would it increase you know for how much would the payment increase for increases in the amount borrowed well all right this is a good visual of it but let's get down to the numbers so it's linear i'm just going to do the slope formula and i'm just going to pick two values you know and you know x1 and then the payment and notice this i just put rate and time here and i define them up here just a different way of doing it i'm using the same numbers consistently throughout this i feel like that would be good for the consistent example and just pick two x values calculate the payment based on those x values and calculate the slope formula and what we'll find so without rounding now notice this is you know dollars and cents so really it would go up you know six cents for every ten dollars of you know price increase or we can you know multiply it by a thousand here and say it would go up six dollars you know because 5.99 i'll round up it would go up your mortgage rate would go up six dollars for every thousand extra dollars you borrow and now you have that in in mind oh okay an extra thousand that's going to be an extra six dollars in the monthly payment and you know you can put things in perspective do i like it that much you know oh the extra thousand it's only six more dollars so we see some things we can do with this we can take these formulas that we we've been working with and we can define them as their own functions we can use them in sliders we can graph them and finding aspects of the graph that we can use and finding aspects of the graph we can do other analysis this is kind of like we want to be building upon for our data analysis so this is all good and i want to actually then have like a bonus here beyond the python i know this is almost all python but i want to get into showing how you can do this in a spreadsheet because that will give you like that full amateurization table and i want you also how to build that because these are some good spreadsheet skills you'll want okay so notice the balance here is a formula but we'll get to that in a second so given that given a home price i picked this two hundred and fifty thousand that's somewhere around the median home price in the united states right now i want it to be some realistic middle of the road number down payment it's going to be we want 20 percent so notice if i click on this this is cell g3 up here is the formula and i just did 20 times g2 0.02 times g2 so that way if i change this and i make g2 you know 300,000 instead click somewhere else then it will automatically calculate the down payment i think i do want to go back to 250,000 again that's i feel like that's a good middle of the road number for us to use as our example and click and it'll adjust again now then the borrowed amount i would subtract that so i'm going to double click in this and equals g2 minus g3 actually that's exactly what i wanted sometimes sometimes google will prompt you will give you that and notice that i can click on this and you can see the borrowed amount and then up here this is the formula g2 minus g3 which is the home price minus the down payment all right so let's just say the interest rate you know 0.06 and time uh 30 years now i'm going to write the word years here i'm not going to use this number for anything else but here the interest rate i will all right now monthly payment we can always then go right back to this and calculate the monthly payment so we see here i just had this monthly payment there you go six percent 30 years and i already have this so what if i just made it my borrowed amount which was 200,000 even and i can just go to this borrowed amount oh 200,000 now i could actually also just make another since i already have that payment i could actually right under here write print payment 250 uh 200 comma 0.06 comma 30 so you see i could just actually just put this in here and output the monthly payment all right there we go 11.99 and 10 cents so monthly payment will be 11.99 and 10 cents so now notice here this is just a couple of things that we can do here and 10 cents so now notice here this is just a good reference for all the things we want home price down payment and everything but these notice i already had to just populate over here the monthly payment and if you'll notice i have these dollar signs here that's going to be for some things we're going to do later i mean i don't need them over here but we're going to do some things later we're going to drag these formulas down and it's going to adjust for according to the row and the dollar sign will keep that the same so dollar sign g dollar sign four that means if i ever adjust this that's not going to change it's going to stay too it's going to stay referencing that cell g4 and same with the payment that's always going to reference g7 and that's what i that's what i want now the interest we've been doing all these fancy interest formulas but actually this is going to be monthly each of these is going to be a each of these roads is going to be a month so for monthly interest we can just do simple interest equals the print that balance which is a2 times the rate which is 0.06 times the time which is one month so one month is one twelfth of a year so i'm just going to say divided by 12 and this works out i mean you know that's very nice but it's not always going to work out evenly so what i want to do is i want to add another function around here round round open parentheses and i will put you know so it rounds this and if i don't put anything else you see it'll round it to the whole number but i want to put comma two because that'll round it to two decimal places and this is google sheets if you you do this in microsoft excel you have to have that comma and then however many decimal places even if it's zero google if i eliminate that it'll just round it to the whole number so there we go so round i have my payment and then my new balance equals the original balance which was a2 plus the interest of the crude so that's b2 minus the payment which is c2 and i want to take this so we see even you know earned a thousand dollars in interest you know just you know just sometimes it's a lot to stop and think about that and all that the paid you just took a little bit off because that earned a thousand dollars in interest and then the payment was only 11.99 so a little bit of that like 200 bucks went to the paying down the original principle so i want to take this because then we have the balance it accrues interest i make a payment new balance and i want to take this and carry it over here so that was cell d2 so i'm just going to put equals d2 here here and here now notice if i drag this down it changed because it's calculating the interest now based on this this balance you see a3 times 0.06 divided divided by 12 and then here when i drag that down it's going to be the same because i put the dollar sign in there it won't adjust anything and here i will drag this down one and we see again doing that it adjusts it for this row now everything here was based on row two everything here is based on row three and we got that by mousing over the bottom right hand corner you get a little tiny plus sign and this is magnified but you know you'll see the that thin plus sign and you click and drag that but we're going to do that for the entire row so i'm holding down shift in the arrow key to highlight the entire row and i'm going to mouse over that i get that thin plus sign and i'm going to click and drag and this is how we make our amateurization table now notice my mouse is down below the bottom of this because for 30 years that's 360 months so somewhere around there is where i'll stop and these are all negatives so i'm going to take this highlight all these negative numbers and then just delete them so now here this is you know after this the balance is a dollar so so we can just make this 11.99 plus that additional dollar 13 and i'm not going to take it to multiple decimals like that and that should be yes 10 cents negative 10 cents dollar three three and that should be enough to make that we're just going to call it that many zeros we're going to call it zero and what we have the row number is always one more because we had the first row as headings so three given that mortgage payment it works out exactly 30 years exactly 360 months you have a balance of zero so we're going to take take this and we see this is the amateurization table and you know you can look through it and scroll through it and see how the payment stays the same but what happens is the amount of interest keeps going down gradually because for such a large amount of money for such a long period of time every month the fact that you're paying interest on just that little bit less that really makes a difference and then that means that look you know that same payment a little bit less interest a little bit more of it goes to the principal so you know you're you're making some progress paying this off but it takes a while until see look at this i mean that's almost 1200 so we have to go into you know 225 months you know we're coming up on 20 years until you know half of your payment goes to interest or less than half of your payment goes to interest so it's just good interesting to see that whole table and then this balance here at any given month that's the payoff amount you know supposing you come into some money and you say oh i just want to pay off the rest of it you know that that's the balance that's your payoff amount and we have all this now besides showing you the spreadsheet and how you can set this up and how we can you know grab values from other cells and how we can add formulas and how we can drag all this down that's great amortization and you know mortgage mort you know it does sound like death because you know it is the same word mort so let's do something more positive with a very similar type of formula so supposing i set up the same thing balance interest i'll capitalize it and payment but i'm going to say contribution and then new balance so let's look at this in a more positive way supposing that what this was this amount that you owed that you're paying off but let's talk about a retirement account that you're adding to so i don't know let's let's start by some like round number like five thousand dollars and a lot of retirement accounts you know people managing it could you know get like eight percent interest that's pretty reasonable to think of so we have equals so we have equals so this is column i two times zero point zero eight eight percent interest and then for one month so then you know one twelfth of the year so divided by 12 there we go and maybe you know we could do this we could do this with or without rounding i'll round it that might that might work out it'll just look nicer round and i'll round it to two decimal places again dollars and cents okay now monthly contribution so who knows like you know you can contribute a few hundred dollars let's start with something like this like let's start with like 200 and we're going to change that later so with balance it gains some interest and you contribute so it's all plus equals i2 plus j2 plus k2 and then we're going to carry that around so that's l2 equals l2 l2 and we're going to do the same thing drag this down one drag this down one drag this down one and what we have is you know given that you know rate of interest given the contribution you could always add more different times but i want to show you this for about the same amount of time so if we drag this down now this being a retirement account a lot of times people will start this earlier so we don't really even have to stop at 360 let's stop with like 400 nice even number there um there we go uh 401 because the first rose so what we have is this at that point then you know this amount that you have is 469 thousand dollars and the interest every month is 3000 this 3000 so you could easily like take that interest and then you're back to 465 you take that 3106 out every month and live on that and then you're back down to this so you know it it you know goes from this and then back to this take that out and then you're back to this that's one way to do it i just want to show you so let's let's get even more optimistic here and say then we contribute something like you know 400 dollars a month we're going to drag that down in a little bit and this one let's say you know 0.085 i don't know a little bit more optimistic on the there we go drag that down a little bit and so now that second row again is correct and we'll drag this down and the other thing i'm going to do is take this a little bit longer maybe even like uh 450 months or something like that 40 years would be 480 months so we can take this even further and you'll see that just you know some of these you know you get some poss some nice possibilities here all right and because look at this final number here so because look at this final number here so yes that one is one million so you know that's what we're talking about here you know one million dollars and the monthly interest is nine thousand eight hundred eighty five dollars so this is something you know again i want to you know take this same math and turn it around and make it positive something that you could be contributing to and then at this point you have this money you know in this investment that you can take this out every month or or less and you know not have to worry about it ever running it running out take that out and then you're still left with this you know more than a million boom take that out live off the interest and you still have this every month take that out you still have this to generate interest the next month and these are some of the things that you can look at that you know from the other side of it you know you owe all this money to pay off this mortgage but then you own this house and on the same time you're contributing and you know here then you have money that you can live off of and you know these you know these are the types of things we want to do with our math skills look at how we can manage manage money to you know later on in life then have this you know property that has equity and you know as value and something else in the bank that you can live off of and there we go you know putting the math skills to use and seeing how you can make this work for you seeing the trends that you know it seems like now you might be working hard and owing a lot and not having that much but you know over time like many years you build things and then you have things oh i have this that i can now you know they've built over decades and can live off of it so that's really good and you know we were doing some of this with the other uh python you know generating just some of the values but you see like these you know these are some of the ways you can make this work for you and you know look at the trends and hopefully this helps you make some decisions about investments you know whether it be real estate or borrowing money or other retirement investments all right so that was just you know some bonus and there we go we're in the home stretch hopefully you're really seeing this all come together you know skills that you're building building so let's talk about exponents and logarithms so the exponential form is this two to the exponent three two to the third power equals eight so we know how to do that we've been doing this so far in algebra then logarithm is the same information rearranged so this same information the log base two of eight equals three so the logarithm is always what's the exponent that's what we want to know that's what we want to know and in what we've been doing so far and in most calculators you know two to the third no problem i know how to put that into the calculator in python they don't even have to import anything but if i know the base and i know what i often call the result if i know the base i know the result but the exponent is what i don't know then that sometimes becomes a problem especially when it doesn't work out nicely like this works out but supposing you know it wasn't a nice you know a nice nice exponent even nice exponent like three supposing you know two to what exponent gets me nine or ten it's going to be some weird decimal but how do i how do i get that and so you know we we have to appreciate that you know uh john napier you know spent like about 400 years ago spent like 20 years of his life figuring this out and making tables and now we have this at the touch of a button on the calculator and we're going to look at also how to write the code for this now with logarithms we do have to import something but you know we'll import a library you know much quicker than spending 20 years years of your life figuring this out so if we have you know two to the third um you know the the base is always going to be whatever you know the same thing with an exponent what i call the base so if i have you know log base two of eight you know it's what's the exponent now what's interesting is our count in our calculators we you know you can do the log you'll see a log button now if i have the log if i just say the log of a hundred and supposing i don't see any number there if i don't see a number then it's understood base 10 and we call and we call that the common log because our number system is base 10 so if it's 10 i don't have to write that and so the log of a hundred is two because 10 to the second power is 100 and we're going to use this a lot of times for working with scientific notation and maybe even converting decimals so that you know that's that's where a lot of times i i'm going to use the common log and then i might even if i'm doing things like scientific notation i might even do the floor function because if you know what's the log uh you know like 150 it's going to be two point something but then for converting it to scientific notation i may be just interested in the two because then that tells me to move the decimal place too so then that would be you know 1.5 times 10 to the second you see you know different things that we want to do with uh converting this for scientific notation all right other interesting things about logarithms well that exponents and logarithms they're inverses of each other so if i have um if i have the log base two of two to the third then or actually i'm not even going to put it to a definite number i'm going to call this x because then anytime the answer is x you see if i take the log of the exponent anytime you have a function of its inverse it cancels out to x now now notice then what we're saying here the log base two so two to what exponent gets me two to the x oh x is the exponent you know makes sense and the same type of thing works with if i have two to the log base two of x exponent same thing that's exponent and log inverse because remember take a look at this log base two of x so it's two to what exponent gets me x so remember anytime we log we want the exponent two to what exponent gets me x and whatever the answer is it's an exponent and i am and then in fact taking two to that exponent so i would end up with x so we see you know that we're going to use these inverses and this is where it becomes very useful you know for whatever for whatever base i have if i'm solving something if i have three to the x equals you know 25 now that doesn't work out nicely if it was 27 x is three that's nice but i know i'm going to do this on the calculator what am i going to put on the calculator well how can i get how can i get it to x equals something well if it's three to the x then if i take the log the log base three of this three to the x and then on the other side it's going to be the log base three of 25 so in algebra in the things you know i do the same thing to both sides what are the things that i can do well one of the things i can do to both sides is take the log of both sides as long as it's the same base so if i take the log and i pick base three because of this because then that cancels down to x and then over here i have the log base three of 25 which is what i would do in the calculator and we'll see in the code you know we're going to import a library and we'll be able to do this you know no problem on the calculator or in the python code now another thing is if you're on a calculator or you know you want to do different sort of python code i could just do the common log for this it actually works out also the log of 25 divided by the log of three so the log of this divided by the log of the base and again it can use common log or whatever i'd want for that so you know that's pretty interesting you know what another way that like that works so change of base formula if you ever find yourself in a situation where you don't have the ability to do the log of any base you know you can use you can use whatever logarithm you have and do this so that's where you know exponents and logs we use that inverse property when we're solving and that comes up a lot you know if i if i want to look at things you know things that are growing exponentially anything continuous growth sometimes it's you know radioactive decay for dating carbon all kinds of things sometimes i'm in this situation exponent my unknowns in the exponent and so i want to use a logarithm to figure that out the other log is going to be the so we have all the different bases and the common log which is base 10 but then i also have the natural log and if i was writing this it's i'm going to i'm going to write it as l n we'll see that a lot of the logarithm functions in python they actually if i just say log it actually goes to natural log not base 10 so that that's really interesting in python the default is natural log if i don't put another base there but if i was writing it out it's l n for natural log and so if i have the natural log of of anything so the natural log means that it's base e and so and base e e is about equal to that 2.71828 1828 and then after that it's less than five but then you know it just that pattern stops so oh 2.71828 so he's about 2.71828 1828 and it keeps going this is used for a lot of continuous growth formulas so if i have you know the natural log of you know 2.7 well then my answer is going to be you know about one it's going to be a little bit less than one it's like 0.99 or something like that you know 0.99 and i can you know i can use the natural log for for some other things and we'll see some of the applications of that too when we get to the code but that's where if i have base e so if if it's base e i just make this l n if it's base 10 i can just write log and if it's any other base and the bases we usually want to have them as whole numbers but if it's any other base then i'm just going to actually write the base so okay so we take a look at this we'll see how we can actually calculate a lot of this in the code and that's going to be pretty useful for some of the some of the applications we have so let's take a look at the code so when using logarithms in python we'll just import the math library and now we have math dot log there we go math dot log and it takes two arguments the number and then the base so this is math dot log of 10 000 base 10 so when i run it there we go it'll be four this works out nicely for things that we know are going to be a nice integer but i also want to show you that python weirdness sometimes even when you think it's going to be a nice integer math dot log of a thousand base 10 so i expect this to be exactly three but when i run it it gives me this long decimal so any of these even when you think it's going to work out nicely just the way that this works behind the scenes you might want to just build in a rounding function here so i'm going to round all this math dot log of a thousand base 10 and i'm going to round all that to four decimal places so you just might want to build build that in so that way you're going to get that answer and notice i still said four decimal places but because it worked out not rounding not needing decimal places it didn't have to give me like four zeros after the decibel there we go so that's just the usefulness of it that it's just worth it build the round function in there all right so that said i have a few of these that i don't have the round function just to show you what the exact answer might be so if i have base two there we go again import math and then we're going to do math dot log in this case 16 base 2 so when we run it it's going to be four and i don't have the log in there so if i have something like 15 base 2 i don't have the rounding so you see it'll give you all that if you need these decimals all these decimals for for something it will give you that but there you go just whatever the number is and then base natural log i'm going to import math again and notice here i can just do math dot log of a number and if i don't give it that second argument of what the base is it'll default to natural log and e is about 2.7 so if we we do this we see you know it gives it that rounding now what i also want to show you is as we were talking about before uh so math dot e if i just want to use e for anything math dot e is going to be the most exact you know it'll give you all those decimal places you don't have to just you know guess at it but also e to the fourth then and i store that as variable x so if i have e to the fourth and then i take the log which is the natural log my answer should be four because the log of that exponent or if i have e to the third the answer is three so you know if i use that math dot e to get the most exact uh approximation of e and then log without the other argument then it will cancel out and that'll that'll work out the same way if i did like you know 10 to the fifth and then log you know base 10 you know that works too so just just to show you this all right so other good uses of log or especially natural log answering the question how long will it take for an investment to double and i still wanted to put the algebra in here so if we have our general continuous growth formula so i have p and then i have the annuity what number p what what it starts out as an annuity what number it ends up so if it's doubling then whatever i have for p doubling would be two p whatever the number is so i can divide both sides by p and then i get this e to the rt equals two so as we were looking before about getting to exponents if my unknowns in the exponent it what's my base and then i'm going to take that log of both sides so if it's base e i'm going to take the natural log so on the left i have the natural log of two and on the right natural log of e to the rt as we just saw is going to be that exponent so that's why we do that if it's base e i'll take natural log and then they will cancel out the function of its inverse and then if i want to solve for t now i have rt divide by r so i would have this the natural log of two divided by r gives me how long it would take money to double so we can just put this in some code i'll just define r as the rate here you know two percent you know sort of like a low inflation rate and natural log of two divided by the rate so i am going to round this log two so notice no other argument there log two and divided by r and also the rounding is no other argument so it'll be a whole number there we go and we get it to be 35 years so if something's increasing at two percent 35 years from now it'll be double and like i said as a low inflation rate something that costs whatever now 35 years from now it'll be about double that price so we have this or if i have you know some investment you know oh nine you know nine percent and i say oh this you know this seems to be doing okay i put money in this investment how long will it take for that money to double in this case eight years so there we go so you know some people might make that determination for what they invest in and there we go answering that question write some code so in graphing this i want to show you this pattern of graphing the exponent and the logarithm so we're going to do all the usual imports for any graph we're going to do all the usual you know x min x max set the dimensions here and we've done this before when we use numpy i need the no i need this the number of points here because then i'm going to create my numpy array np dot linspace from x min to x max using this many points so there's my array now for this i also created a second array array specifically because my x min i don't want it to go down to negative 10 i wanted to start at 0.01 and we'll see that in a second and then again set up all the all the graph here so i'm going to graph this first line here y1 equals math dot e to the x so there we go i imported math just for this using math dot e so if i'm graphing e to the x plot that and then line two so then if it's e to the x i want to do the natural log and so notice it's log and i didn't use the math one here i wanted to use the np dot log for use the numpy because i'm graphing so numpy has log built in also so i want to use that because i'm graphing that'll match up with with the numpy array and that's this is why i wanted x2 as my argument here because logarithms can't be zero and they can't be negative so i didn't this actually would give give an error but it would still graph it just with that error and i didn't feel like seeing that so i i created that other array starting at 0.01 so there we go so now i have e to the x natural log and my line three it's just y equals x all right so this is what this looks like and this blue line that curves upward that's the exponential function and going to the left it actually doesn't really touch zero it just gets really really close beyond what this display can show but it doesn't ever get to zero and then this orange line that logarithm it the x value can't be zero and then it goes up and it has this curve to it as x gets bigger this increases but it not so much especially as it goes on and on and then the green line is y equals x so if it looks like these are mirror images of each other across that line that's true like any inverse functions they are mirror images across the line y equals x so kind of cool how that works out so we see this numpy arrays of points e to the x natural log of x and just as a slight comparison i wanted to show you that if i have two to the x and i'm going to use this and comment out this other one so instead of e to the x if i have two to the x all right there you go two exponent x and then here i have the log base two and again i'm going to use numpy and you see numpy's log instead of a second argument they have different functions so this is so log is natural log log two is log base two and then there's log 10 so those are the main ones you'd you'd want to be able to use there we go so i'm gonna have log two here and then the line y equals x so if i run that it's going to be slightly different because two is not as big as 2.7 but very similar and often you know if but if it were my drawing i i wouldn't be able to draw the subtle differences so i would say oh they all kind of look the same you know exponential logarithmic y equals x there we go so we use these as some good good estimates here all right we can also use logs for scientific notation now here i just had it print out 3.2 times 10 to the fifth now i wrote that in scientific notation but it'll print it out with with all the zeros here and here i have it as a negative exponent 4.5 times 10 to the negative second there we go and you might be wondering about that comment why negative two works fine why that's an important thing and there we go uh we see the output here because exponent negative three gets weird very interesting because the exponent of positive three 10 to the third you know got a little weird too and you see just the way it works behind the scenes the negative three we would think that it would stop there and that'd be fine but it gives you all these other zeros and then a five at the end unnecessary but as i was mentioning before the rounding will will solve a lot of these problems so you know i just use this with for the for the negative four so i have this 10 4.5 times 10 to the negative four and i'm going to round it to five decimal places so if i have a negative exponent let's say negative four then i want to round it to five decimal places and then that gives all of these because it'd be 4.5 and i want that extra decimal place to show that so you see rounding rounding again works out very nicely and then if i have negative five and greater it forces the scientific notation so as much as i want to say that i'm just going to print this out i already have it in scientific notation i even say round it to six decimal places doesn't matter the output python wants to put in scientific notation and notice this e is not e 2.7 but it's 4.5 times 10 to this exponent so python uses this and a lot of calculators use that notation also we can convert something to scientific notation if i take this so i want to get the number of decimal places so if i take the log so this is variable a so if i take the log of a and base 10 so this one i'm just using the math library if i take the log but since it's not 0.001 it's not going to work out to it's going to be like one it's going to be like one point you know it's going to be like uh this is four decimal places is going to be four point something so that's why i want to do math dot floor to get just that exponent i want to chop off all the the extra decimals in my answer here and then the log of that the floor of that is going to be the exponent so that's what's going to give me that negative four and then if i take n i'm going to round that 10 divided by that exponent and this formula also works for larger numbers too but if i take that and then round it then in this case rounded to two decimal places that's fine that's n i could stop there but i have this extra loop here just in case there's rounding errors because it could work out somewhere that n ends up being greater than 10 you know that that happens and so in that case then i then i want to make sure that i still get true scientific notation one number than the decimal so there we go i'm going to just if it's greater than i'm going to increase the exponent now for this one there you go a equals point zero zero zero five and there we go it gives you point zero zero zero five equals five times ten to the negative four and then this should work for all kinds of other exponents that you're converting it to scientific notation if you wanted to so these are some of the uses of logarithms you know we can see the graph that's pretty interesting but we can see the applications the solving sometimes if my unknowns in the exponent we can see converting to and from scientific notation so these are a few applications of logarithms and i'm sure you will find even more so you can make use of make use of this code and enjoy here we have the foundational math three certification three and like the others you're going to make a copy first of all and work through this whole notebook make a copy put it in your google drive and then from your copy we'll do first step like before according to the testing library and later on in this unit or the next unit we'll look at the mechanics behind this and how you can set up your own virtual your own library hosted on github and use that import that into whatever notebooks you want so you know as you can see here we have the first step whatever notebooks you want so you know as we get through this course you know you see the mechanics of setting it up and then you'll learn how to set up all these things but for now i just have the comments here you know install requests here's the library and when we run this then it will get the library take it uh as as a new file locally here uh behind the scenes we won't have to worry about it and it's imported there we go and this last thing says that yes it works and so we will go on to the next step there we go and remember the runtime run uh it times out you know 12 hours consecutively at the most or about a half hour of inactivity so you just just get in the habit if you know working on part of this you leave come back then you go and run this first cell again so we were looking a lot of into graphing before now we're going to graph inequalities so when i have let's say y is greater than or equal to 2x well if i have then if i can graph a line but how do i shade that well we have this argument here fill between and so it gives us a range of values so we're going to go here import matplot library and import numpy like we were doing before and we're going to set our window like we were doing before how many points you know numpy that linspace give our points setting up the graph all this is very similar this one got a little fancy put a title on there so we have the plot title y1 just like we would do before supposing i was graphing this just as a line we see all the similarities there we go here's the code change and remember this we have plot these two and then we have this third argument we had this third argument so if you're working through this and remember you know this if you're watching this video maybe hopefully you already did work through this so this is going through you know double checking anything you did or if you want any deeper insight about this but then we have the second arguments are the fill between so this one notice we have here you see it's fill between so we still have one x value and the y values are what we're between so between y1 and zero and i'm just going to run this to show you you see it fills between y1 and zero so that doesn't matter you know that's not a consistent you know over on the left here zero is up top and over on the right it's down to zero but thinking about the top of the graph oh what if i just change that to if i want to shade above what if i change that to y max without the caps without the caps and then we're always shading above between that line and the maximum y value so you see then shade below you can change it to y min and there we go and when we do that there we go code test passed so part two well we had this one is a nice solid line and remember then that's greater than or equal to but what if i wanted you know not that solid line so we have all the rest of the same things here we know the logic of this so now if i have y min now that's going to change you know to shade below and this is the only thing we're going to change if i have this remember the default gives me a line until i do the fill between but what if i wanted this to be a dotted line so we see you know see if i have b dash dash r dash dash gives it a dotted red line and we run this so now we see and sometimes i'll do that i'll make the line red so that it really stands out if i made the blue just blend in so now we know this would be less than but not equal to and there we go yes and knowing now that we can make some lines you can define these lines you can define these lines we can make art for example we can do that fill between and we can fill between two different graphs two different functions oh that might be interesting then this defaulted to notice i didn't even define the color blue here but i can define that face color what color do i want to do i want to make this so so if you know like a lot of your basic colors you actually can just get away with just putting that you know i want to be green put it in green in quotes single quotes yellow a lot of the common color names this will work out so that'll work so the directions here would be run the code and then reverse the order so we see here like before here's the graph this is the line we're plotting and remember we defined the x value up here once so here's this y value plot this i'm not worried about making a particular line so two arguments are fine and now i have the fill between and see what i have x y1 and between that and 10 or i could just easily make it you know y max but that's fine and then i add the other argument face color red line two i have this and fill between now notice between y2 and y1 so you know we can always define it as you know between other values that's this is this will come up especially if you want to make art you can define your lines and then fill between these lines i mean this is really vector graphics so then change this you know we have this color and same thing all of these you know this line y3 and i'm going to fill between y3 and y2 next one y4 there is that function fill between y4 and y3 and so when we run this see that first one it filled between there up to the top and then i did not decide to have another one to fill down to the bottom we just left it here so if we take this and reverse the colors so we're just going to take these face colors and make the first one blue there we go and we'll reverse them blue green yellow and then red at the end so the next one will be green and the next one will be yellow and the next one will be red there we go so now we have this and we see when we run it it reversed the colors so there we go interesting things you can do and if you were making art you can make these whatever formulas you want remember you know we were looking at all the different you know you know quadratic you know uh exponential functions so if you want different curved lines and you can just define that you want it to be between something and something and where i define this linspace here once so that's the reason why all these go to the edge but you could always for each of them you could define lines you can define that linspace as within certain values and you can make all kinds of shapes and then continuing on what we're doing with other graphing i kept these axis lines but you could always eliminate them too there we go you just keep your window size but then you could always eliminate each axis again you can again you can get creative with this make some different art all right and now we get into looking further into factoring into representing equations so monomial is one thing uh we see that mono is one and then it actually overlaps n o m is name that exact word is name in some languages and then i al just makes it a noun so one thing one term so each term has a sign coefficient and variable and an exponent we don't think about that all the time but when we see it here definitely i see a negative sign i see the coefficients three x to the second power so but if i have you know all of these the term x also has that so this is positive one x to the first power just things to think about because that really comes into play for some other things that we do with factoring etc even even a constant like five is five to the zero five five x to the zero because x to the zero is one and this will help us you know in thinking about each of these you can have a monomial and just make sure that you define each of these even though sometimes these values might be one or zero and you might not display them so here we have this now this is just a very interesting within simp i we have eq which is going to display the equation and you see how this equation is eq and then in parentheses i'm going to have what's on the left and then what's on the right so i define it as an equation and left and right just gets separated by a comma so you see what we have here so just showing you that this is one way you could you could use this within simp i for some other things that you might have been doing in in other parts of this course you know if you wanted to make sure you have a nice display at the end you know bring up eq you know use your variables that you already have and you see we just defined x as the as the symbol here so we could do this and then just display it and then look at that nice display there we go and so we have monomials one thing binomial bi is two trinomial is three and after that we kind of stop counting so polynomial is just many poly is many three and we'll usually put them in order so we take x as the variable we'll put them in order of the highest exponent and if we want to graph this then it would be all that equal to y so there we go here's your example and it continued on to the next line so what i can do is if if i know this i this is the normal standard standard form setup so you could prompt for each of these coefficients and then display them and so there's what we have here that's what i'm asking you to do so we're going to use this display and we're also going to use some math we're also going to to import everything from simpy so now we have these symbols and we want a coefficient and yes i do want to cast it as an integer though i mean realistically the coefficients do not have to be integers so there's our coefficient and a and b continue to prompt for variable c and d so what you can do is you can copy this and make this c input coefficient c and then we'll do for d input coefficient d all right so we've done that and now we want to display the full one so we have we're going to display ax to the third bx squared and then we do the rest plus c x plus d and notice we you might have remembered this from before yeah in in writing the math i just put these right next to each other ax means i'm multiplying but remember the python notation i have to put that multiplying in there so it is ax to the third bx squared cx d there we go now we have this this is great we have this in python notation and we were just talking about we want to display this in a nice way oh well i have to convert that to latex which is really the way we're going to you know to display math terminal math formulas so now we have this i'm going to convert that python to there you go so if we have this two two three four and five so you see we can take this and convert it that way you have all this for things you know we're thinking ahead we're building things that you can use you have all this that once you bring in these coefficients you could do other math to this here and then maybe at the very end display this this formula in a nice way so there we go that's what we have and yes that does look nice so this is going through so interactive polynomial so now we're going to take this this you know here's well quadratic but there we go and given this polynomial we're going to adjust each of these coefficients so again in doing this this certification notebook you should see that this is coming up you know things that you've done before and hopefully you've already worked through this and you know maybe there's just some of these that you were stuck on or if you forgot so remember we were doing before that plot library in line and we're going to bring in the interactive from the widgets there we go all these things and remember these the function of a b and so for this one we're going to change it to include a third slider so there we go so my function needs to include c because i need these three inputs great and then all the rest of these are fine ax squared plus bx i have to add this plus c c and so that will show the plot and then we want to make all these interactive so i'm going to run this function a b i just need c so we can just copy that comma c so now we will have three sliders a b and c and we have the interactive and then we're going to display the interactive plot so there we go so that's how we can and you see how you know using the same thing you can modify this to have four coefficients so now we see and it looks like nothing because everything is zeroed out but as soon as a gets to be something then we have a quadratic you know negative all right so that's nice and then we have b and it's always interesting to move these and see what this does to the graph so you can tinker with this and see remember that just moves it up or down there we go so you can take these and you can tinker with you know once you have this i mean code test pass but these notebooks you can always tinker with these what you know you pass the test you know you've learned that step you can go back in there and pull around with these sliders and see let's see what it looks like so now we're going to do exponential functions and remember our exponential function y equals a times b to the x and there we go as long as a is greater than zero then we'll have an upward or as long as a is greater than one it'll curve upward and same thing as long as b is greater than one we'll curve upward all right so again thinking about some of the exponential functions the so what we're going to do is we're going to run this code see the sliders and then change the slider so that a actually does have negative values instead of positive so here we have all these importing same imports and notice i made a y minimum and y maximum a lot bigger things grow exponentially so kind of need this to display a decent graph here we just have a and b and you see one to nine we just want them to be positive so when we run this we're just going to see what this looks like there we go and either one you see as i increase this it gets to be steeper but we see the general shape of this it just gets to be steeper and then if i change a it just gets to be steeper and then if i change a i'll even make this low because it don't it still will be positive so that's that's really all these you know they kind of do the same thing thing maybe b has a little more of an effect but then you see it's kind of that same upwards upward curve and then as the x values get negative this really doesn't touch it's you know you can get it's beyond what the resolution of any computer screen could do because if you keep zooming in in you know it looks like it doesn't touch and then it looks like it does but if you zoom in then it doesn't so you know that's the general trend so if we make this negative then we still need to do one more thing because this interactive graph takes this range as lowest to highest so net making it negative negative one is not the lowest we have to switch these negative nine is the low value and negative one is the high value remember because it's more negative so if we don't switch those also then we would get an error so we get this and we can run this and we see just making the a value negative would make the whole graph go below the y-axis because b to the x would be positive still so then a being negative there you go just flips it and just a note making b negative i'm not going to even worry about doing this right now but if we did that it works for integer values of the exponent but since this is a continuous graph it would be integer it would be work it would work and it would be you know positive if it's an even exponent negative if it's an odd exponent and it would go up and down like that but all those in between values because that would be mathematically doable also in this case they would actually be imaginary they wouldn't they would not necessarily work out well sometimes if we had you know some of them would and it would just be a mess so we're not we're not even going to mess with that changing b to negative it just really would end up not displaying anything but behind the scenes that's what's happening it works out for some values but doesn't work out nicely for others and you know a graph would be a mess but let's look at stuff that does work out nicely percent increase so hopefully you remember the formula from working through it in the previous unit but then we have you know all the percent increase and if i were to graph this so we have a equals p times one plus r to the t and a is annuity and that would be the y value if you were graphing this and you would know p and you would know r so t would be time in years but that would be the x value if you were graphing it and so we have all this yes p is the principal the amount you start out with r is the rate converted to a decimal and t is time in years and just the way we often see it p usually is capitalized so it's just interesting in in my variables i kept them all lowercase but a lot of times you'll see that written you know they're lowercase but p gets capitalized um all right so you have your starting amount so you can prompt for these and then you not have to worry about changing the code well we are going to change this here so you can prompt starting amount as input and converting all these to float numbers so you don't have to worry about changing numbers percentage rate converted to a decimal and how many years that'll be t so we're just going to take this equation and put it down here in python terms so we have p which we would have gotten from here so p times and remember i have to put the times it the multiplication in times one plus the rate and all that to the exponent of time and there we go just translating that equation to to python and then we'll print out the annuity so when we run it starting amount one thousand just take these nice even numbers all right and we have point zero five as the rate so that'd be five percent and how many years then let's see uh let's say like seven years all right and i didn't worry about putting in another function around this but you probably would but there you go to two decimal places this is what the annuity would be thousand dollars at five percent for seven years and then we have percent decrease very similar formula except notice we're subtracting inside the parentheses because it's one minus three and this does this does happen we does happen we have car value values of cars or some other products that might decrease at a certain percentage rate every year the decay of some elements so that radioactive decay or certain elements like carbon 14 that are very predictable so that decays at a definite rate knowing how much that we can measure how much that is we can figure out the the age of something some sales discounts maybe there's something that decreases at a percentage you know every week if it's not sold so you have some applications of this and notice we're going to do same thing prompt for pr and t and then we'll put our formula in here very similar p times and then in parentheses one minus r close the parentheses exponent t so there we go and we see you know the jupyter notebook the colab notebook always wants to give us tool tips and advice on what variable and everything so there we go we have this and we'll run it all right so there you go so let's just say i had my you know twenty thousand dollar car that uh decreases at 0.09 which might be the you know rate of decrease who knows and then how many years will decrease you know let's just say 10 so there you go that twenty thousand car twenty thousand dollar car average uh rate of decrease depreciation is nine percent so it loses nine percent of its value every year for ten years so then ten years later that car is worth seventy seven hundred dollars seventy seven eighty eight that might be the case i mean you know this is not uh don't quote me on on this rate but you know for the sake of practicing it that that rate's probably realistic all right so now we have compound interest which is very much like the percent increase but we're taking it you know we could use compound interest we could use that formula before if it's compounded once a year so now we have this formula notice how similar it is but it's r divided by n and then the exponent is nt so if it was compounded once per year and is one so that doesn't that goes back to that formula we were just using but where n is multiple times per year you know this is the formula that we we would use and remember that that's really and that's why we wanted for any percent increase that's why we wanted to convert it to that formula that it's something that's a multiplier and we can then easily adjust the rate of decrease that's why we wanted to convert it to that formula and we can then easily adjust this for how many years something you know increases or decreases and in this case now we had the other twist also then for how many times we are calculating this every year i mean n being 12 that's pretty common you know a lot of banks a lot of bills you know they calculate things you know once a month so we're going to do all these starting amount all the rest very similar and then we're going to add this line here n number of times compounded so using this formula then we'll do p times and in parentheses one plus but now i have r over n i'd rather use extra parentheses just to make sure that nothing gets mixed up in the math uh r divided by n and all that to the so you see r over n in the extra parentheses to the nt but again just to be sure i'll put that in parentheses n times t in parentheses so that way it stays together that python doesn't actually python might not but i want to make sure it doesn't accidentally take it to the n power and then you know well then multiply by t so there we go p times one plus r over n to the nt and that's going to give us our annuity so just to be interesting let's use the same one we did two steps ago that one thousand dollars converted to a decimal and we were saying that that was at 5.05 and we said seven years and and 12 is pretty common but i'm going to say 52 let's say it was compounded you know every every week all year here so what do we get 14 18 and 82 cents and let's just quick go back and compare this to our increase 1407 and 10 cents so look at that just that little amount of money made us another 11 because it was compounded that often it's a little bit more because you have that little bit extra advantage this is money growing and then that little bit extra percent for that little bit more time you know gets you a few more dollars so you might be thinking well okay 52 then maybe 365 would give you a little bit more that's true and we can just quick do that so remember that was 1418 and if we did this so that same thousand dollars percent we're going to do the same 0.05 the same seven years but then this is going to be 365 compounded every day so you see 1419 it gave you another dollar so compared to once a year you know you made about 11 more dollars doing this every week but from every week to every day you know gave you one more dollar so there is a point to where it doesn't really get you that much more and then we start thinking about well okay can I compound it multiple times per day etc that's when we get into continuous growth and continuous growth if i use that formula and then compounded it multiple times a day if i compounded that like three times a day and who knows maybe i just make could even make n like an even thousand it starts approaching this other formula for continuous growth so to recap so there you go that's you know money compounding annually so that's the percent increase but we take it as annually and then n times per year we have this formula and then as n gets to be really big like i said like a thousand or something it actually approaches this other formula pe to the rt and this is useful because as we see later better ways to even figure out what the rate or the time would be if i know these other values so it goes from this a little more complicated to i actually think this is a little bit easier formula p times e to the rt and that e is not just a random variable e is this constant equal to about 2.718281828 that 1828 after looping through that twice the next time it's not exact so it's not just like this you know keeps repeating that would make it even easier but it actually after that second time then it's a little bit different okay so we give the code that we're already going to prompt for these and this time we're going to add one more import statement we're going to import math so that we can use math.e you know you don't have to worry about typing in this because actually math.e is going to take it to even more decimal places so we have the same thing here principal rate time and there you go time and that can be an integer that doesn't have to be it can be an integer or float and is going to be an integer because you can you can't like maybe you know how many times do you compound it you can't say like oh one time i kind of like halfway did it that doesn't work okay so now we're going to use these these same formulas we did before annual so that's going to be p times times one plus r exponent t just like that first formula and then this one is going to be p times one plus the extra parentheses r over n all that to the exponent of nt so these are those two formulas and now this one we're going to use math.e math.e so that's going to be p times math.e to the exponent of r times t so there we go we see pe to the rt t and now we have these three so we can prompt and let's compare these compounded annually compounded n times per year i'm going to put an extra space in there and compounded continuously so let's take something here and let's just say a principle of there we go 11,000 rate 0.06 and time and let's just say you know 15 years n and we only need that for one of those formulas but let's say n is a normal 12 so given this compounded annually you would have this much 2632 compounded 12 times a year 26,995 so wow that made you know more than 630 more dollars just by compounding it but look at that compounded continuously 27,055 so there we go yeah so you see from here from once a year to multiple times we're talking about making you know more than 600 but then from that to compounding it continuously you know compared to the original you know we're up to about 700 more and it kind of evens out that oh and this one i think i it gave this error it gave this error because i used the parentheses so if you're going through this and if you know you know these errors messages are supposed to be hints just to help you out so it was without the parentheses and that is okay because python does no word of operations but without the parentheses it should give us not the error so there we go and should give us the same same values here so 11,000 rate 0.06 time 15 years and and we said it was 12 so we see same values and the error message saying you know maybe i'll go in and change that that the parentheses are okay all right so there we go prompting once and comparing these three different ways of calculating interest interest so now some of this comes in where we have you know some investment here and investment often you know something you might be contributing to for retirement and you have some accumulated value so we have any of these formulas but we also contribute money every month and this i will say month monthly that's that's kind of a normal normal thing so i'm not going to worry about like all the different values that that could be okay so we have something that's going to increase by a percentage and we're using just that simple interest formula interest equals principal times rate times time so that is just simple interest but for one month that works out and for one month t equals one over 12 because time in years but then over 12 you can just divide by 12 so here if i have this we can set up a loop here so prt but then monthly we're going to ask for the monthly contribution all right now this annuity at the beginning it is p what do you have i have this i have this amount done so we'll keep that but it's the it's the annuity variable that we're going to keep updating so somebody said time in years so then our loop is going to be 12 times t so monthly contributions for this long for a and range 12 t t and now let's see we're just going to say first of all the annuity equals annuity plus monthly all right so now that annuity value is greater and then now we want the interest just the interest so that's why simple interest is just the interest equals annuity which is the times rate time and then times one over 12 and i'm just going to say divide it by 12 so we see the in principle times rate times time and then 1 12 is divided by 12 so now we have just the interest and now again i'm going to update annuity annuity equals annuity plus interest annuity plus interest and because i'm making this a loop then you know these other formulas are useful for not having to do a loop but we also wanted to add in this contribution and then there we go so you know we have a few things going on in this loop and then after all the loop it's going to go through and each time you know add the contribution increase it by that percentage for that little bit of time you know now update annuity and keep going so when we have this so starting amount maybe we can say 5 000 and annual percentage rate let's be optimistic for you know some uh you know retirement account 0.08 and then number of years but then these are some of the things you might contribute and then have it grow for years so we can even say some like long amount of time 35 years there we go monthly contribution so let's say like 400 there we go so that's that's what we have you start out and then every month you're contributing 400 and you know we hope it's growing at that rate so given this notice how notice what this number is that's a million dollars so what this is saying is and to get some of these the the rate it it changes that's that's a good estimate but um it's a reasonable very reasonable estimate so putting money away you know start working put five thousand dollars away and some good account for as eight percent for 35 years and then each you know each paycheck you're contributing contributing money then you retire with a million dollars there you go things to think about that you can put away this little bit that you can put away this little bit forget about it for 35 years well not forget but you know and you know have this because if it's earning if it still is earning eight percent as a good estimate eight percent of that million is eighty thousand dollars and that way you know eighty thousand dollars interest you can live on that and it still has the million dollars there to keep generating more interest so there you go okay so we go from the positive saving money and having a million when you retire to mortgage payments and yes more like the word for death somebody originally coined that as you know like this death payment but nonetheless mortgage for any large amount of money over a long period of time those other percent increase formulas won't quite do it otherwise you you will end up paying a lot more than is reasonable so this is the much more complicated formula but remember that's the value of you know setting these up and writing the code that you don't have to like remember this formula or you know plug the numbers in every time you can again prompt for just like we were doing before pr and t and figure out what your monthly payment would be so given that some large some huge amount of money and how banks will set up your mortgage that's um something else but knowing how much you're going to borrow and then being able to just run it through this formula and figure out what would your monthly payment be that's going to be very useful you and again this applies to mortgage or possibly car payments because that's also large enough sum and a long enough time that this is a much better formula so this is the this is the formula and again p is principal r is rate t is time and this would have n there but n would be 12 each time so i just put 12 in there so it kind of goes along with that formula but n is 12 each time you know there's no other setup you know daily or weekly mortgage payments or yearly no it's it's always monthly all right there we go so we have all these so so now i gave you a hint to do this use other variables i like other variables because look at this r over 12 comes up a few times so you know we can make this um um there you go r over 12 is uh you know multiplier or if you don't want to use other variables you can do this there we go and since i don't have n because n is 12 um i could have i might have like just like math n for numerator and d for denominator and so the payment would be n divided by d because that just might simplify this a little bit um and then it would be p times n divided by d so i could have just my numerator so equals r over 12 times and then in parentheses one over r over 12 oh one oh sorry one plus r over 12 12 and all that to the exponent in parentheses 12 times t so r over 12 times one plus r over 12 to the exponent 12 t there we go so that's the numerator not bad and then i can have the denominator equals so one plus r over 12 there we go to the exponent 12 put up with some parentheses 12 t and now when i subtract one you see then that's definitely not a part of that so yeah and again you could add other variables you can make r over 12 its own variable or something like that you can make one plus r over 12 its own variable you know different ways to do that i feel i felt like this wasn't that bad so but breaking up numerator denominator and then payment times numerator over denominator so we take a look at this and the amount borrowed we could just say like 200,000 uh annual percentage rate 0.07 you know some of the rates have been going up so i'm just going to say that for now and number of years 30 is pretty common and so there we go so there we go so 1330 and change and this helps because then you say okay well you know what's the cost of the house and i have a down payment you know you get down to how much you're borrowing that's one thing okay but what's really going to make the difference is knowing this what would your monthly payment be that's the important thing and you know bonus knowledge that no matter whatever your income is the monthly payment should be for mortgage or rent right it should be one fourth of your income or less so just to remember you know if that's your monthly payment then each month you should be making at least four times that or if you're not then that's not the right house because sometimes you might say oh yeah i'm making more than that i can afford it but then you end up being house poor yes you can afford your your mortgage payment but you can't afford much else all right so let's go on to exponents and logarithms with exponents and logarithms they're inverse functions they're the same information rearranged so i have this example here two to the fourth power equals 16 so there you go two base two the fourth power equals 16 and then the log base two of 16 equals four there we go both of those have the same information rearranged and that's what logarithms are you know picture everything on the one side of the equal sign oh two to the fourth power i know how to do that plug that into the calculator but supposing it's the exponent you don't know the log base two of 16 the answer is an exponent you know what exponent gets me to that so uh this guy john napier like 400 years ago you know he was a 400 years ago he realized that that was a missing piece that that was a situation a lot of people wanted to know the exponent for different things and he spent like 20 years of his life developing this and it was you know very useful you know the original logarithms it was just books you could like look them up now we have this at the benefit of you know calculator pretty easy and we're going to take it one more we're going to even write the code that you can just put in a couple numbers and it'll calculate it so if you use the math library and we'll also look at the numpy library that's another way but if you use the math library so it's math dot log and then the arguments are you know the log of what so 16 and then comma and then what's the base so there we go and if you don't have that first argument or if you don't have the second argument if you just say the log of 16 it takes it as base e but we'll get to that later all right so there we go the log base two of 16 so here's the code we're going to import math and you know base i always call the the exponent the result just because it reminds me i'm doing a logger and that's what i want so there we go so or you know that's the the result of exponential notation so i had somebody input the base and we're going to input cast as a float and the base can be a float but usually it's an integer and the result and cast that as a float so what do we want to do change the next line okay math dot log and we were just saying result comma base there we go and it'll import this for it and it'll do this for you so that's all you needed to do for this and we'll run it and this should check it for you there we go base 27 oh how about this base um three result 81 so it should return four there we go nice you might be able to do some of these in your head but if you have you know base you know three to what exponent gets you 81 all right you can do that in your head that's four but this is useful three to what exponent gets you like 80 or gets you 85 you know when it becomes some weird decimal all right so natural logs and we talked about e so uh this is the this is another use of a logarithm so e and uh just to recap if you have this formula annuity equals pe to the rt there we go so supposing i want to know how long it will take for something to double and you'll see the logarithm connection here so you know whatever i start out with p the annuity needs to be double so if the annuity is double then whatever p is and annuity is twice then i could cancel it out you know annuity would be 2p so it simplifies to this and then now one of the many situations i want to know the exponent exponent well i have base e so math terms i would say natural log i do the natural log of both sides the natural log of two on the left and the natural log of e to the rt and remember then that cancels the natural log of e to the rt because that says e the natural log says e to what exponent gets me this so e to what exponent gets me e to the rt well it's obviously rt so now we're in this situation we know that take the natural log of both sides now we're in this situation and i get natural log of two good thing i have a calculator to do this and then if i want to know how long it takes to double if i know the rate then i would just divide by the rate and then my answer is time so in doing that math dot log and you see no other argument necessary if i don't put the argument or as far as what base it is it takes it as base e natural log so there we go and in this one r input the rate as a decimal and for this one i just put the end just it's this seemed like a long sentence so the input comes in as a new line on a new line and once the person input the rate there we go it's just math dot log of two divided by r is time and we'll print out it will double in t years this is pretty useful so you can run this now this one remember you just needed to run it so and put the rate so if let's say i have some investment growing at eight percent and it will double in 8.66 years six six years so some of the you know you might say all right if my investment's growing at eight percent and we can even round this down to eight and a half and you can do things in your head okay well eight and a half years it'll double 17 years it'll double from that you know etc and you know you could use this to estimate some outcomes all right common logs so if i have base 10 it's the common log if you were writing this in math notation you would just you could just say log so uh with without the little number because then you know if you don't put the little number then oh we'll take it as base 10 because that's our number system the common log so this is what we're going to be using when we want to have you know how many decimal places do i have we're using things for scientific notation so in the code you see we'll just do math dot log n and then base 10 so you see uh if i don't say the base it's e but 10 even though it's common i do have to say the base there we go so if we have this and our number with several digits or several decimal places and this one i just separated into two lines to show you can do that also take the input you know cast it as n the other reason to put this into two lines is you might notice this vertical line over here maybe even before writing python you know you might have the sense of you know you only want the lines to be so long you don't have to scroll over but python really makes that a design decision if i continued beyond this line it would still work it wouldn't just cut off that code but just as a convention for writing python code we usually make it i think it's like 80 characters brings it over to that line so there we go i have this one and then i didn't want to go further on that line so i just made it a separate line casting that as a float okay so now all right now we have the round the code so this one we have math dot floor so i'm going to take the log of that but i'm not gonna round but instead of running i'm just taking the floor of this because i don't want the decimals i don't i don't want to potentially round it up and i would just you know drop the decimals math dot floor that's going to give me my exponent and that's actually what what we really want and this is a weird python quirk when the exponents exactly three it sometimes doesn't give you the answer you want i don't know it's just weird python quirk so just bonus insight here after doing this enough times i just added this little if statement here all right and we're going to print the exponent so when we run it there we go several digits so if i have point you know zero zero zero five all right and exponent is negative four four yep there we go and if we remove the math dot four function then it will just give us it'll be you know negative four point something else and we'll just do that there we go so you can see and i'll just to compare i'll do the same number point zero zero zero five all right and that's it now notice in positive numbers it would be four point something or three if this was positive three point something and it would drop the decimals it'd be down to three but with negative numbers the floor from negative three point something the floor of that is negative four so just interesting insight and again you're watching this video because if you've gone through the the foundational math three and maybe you're stuck on something you're what we want some other insight into some of these so hopefully you know this helps all right now all that you know we can use these logarithms you know how long to take something to double you know things like this uh number of decimal places and notice i call that exp for exponent because well first of all that's what we're asking for in the logarithm but also that leads to scientific notation you know how can i write very big numbers or very small numbers without all those zeros so if i had like 45 million oh but i can write that as 4.5 times 10 to the seventh or point zero zero zero all these could be 4.5 times 10 to the negative seventh and there we go so it's always n times 10 to an exponent and n is always one digit than the decimal so that's what we want you know because 4.5 that's i want that one digit than the decimal that that's the true scientific notation now this is just changing you know this one here we're not actually writing code this is determine the value by just by counting uh i just want you know just to see so you know as we count so how many decimal place how many places one two three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven because it has to be down to this so that's why we have a one is 1.56 that's where the decimal would go and a2 would be 11 and then we're going to print that out a that that is a1 times 10 to a2 so then we'll do this for here so the decimal point would be there so the decimal point would be there so then it's yeah so then we would move it one two three four five six seven eight nine ten so it would be 4.13 and we have to move it in the negative direction so it'd be to the negative 10 and so then that would print b is 4.13 times 10 to the negative 10 there we go and we run it there we go now now this one works displays nicely this one how we want to display it here is nice but python automatically and this is fine you know you go on the next step but python automatically converted this one a positive 11th power fine it didn't see a reason to change that but negative 10 so that's the python notation 4.13 e negative 10 so and this is not the same e this is just indicating exponent so times 10 to the negative 10 so there we go in this you know hopefully also again if you're watching this it's you know illustrating like why there's some of these quirks in python all right so we can use these logs for scientific notation because if i want you know if i want to convert this to scientific notation in an easy way so what do i do so i did this for for a putting together the things we did in the last two exercises so for a i'm going to do the floor of the log of a base 10 there we go and now i'm going to round it so so it was a i called it x1 for exponent one and so if i have this a times 10 to the negative x1 and it rounds it to two decimal places so if that's the if that's the log then i'm going to multiply this times 10 to the negative x1 and it's going to print this out so i'll just show you the code and then we'll run it and you'll see so now using that as a model what i want x2 and i want to show you that this actually works for positive or negative exponents oh yeah so if we have so but this one i want this for b so take the log of b base 10 and the floor of that and if i have this then i'm going to round that so i'm going to round that um again referencing b this time to the negative x2 to there we go so it's what exponent got me there but then when i take that then that will divide it out that's why it's that that's why it becomes a negative exponent because i want to divide it out to get that early number there all right so if we run this and this just took those so you see we get a is 2.34 times 10 to the negative 12 and b is 1.23 times 10 to the 13th so pretty cool how you could just take this and whether i wanted to show you that whether it be a decimal so a negative exponent or a huge number with the positive exponent either way this this works take the log base 10 and the floor of that and that's the negative exponent that's how we get n1 you know then we're then multiplying it by that and we can display it so and we can display so this way now you have it you can have a code to convert anything to scientific notation pretty cool and that's what we get into step 19 there we go now this one very similar to what we were doing before and we're just added one more thing of entering a number to convert to scientific notation so see this is where you can make it as your calculator to convert because i'll just take this and it works either way i'll copy this code that we had from before and paste it here but i don't need the number ones because i'm only doing one thing right and in that case if we want to print you see i even left this that's what we want to print so we can reuse this and this is the key with copying and reusing code you can do it just be aware to notice these little things if you just copy and paste something there there might be a little subtle things that don't line up you know just copying pasting no good you have to understand the code well enough to know these little things that you need to change oh okay i needed to delete the ones here all around and you know copy and paste with the copy paste with the follow-up editing now that works and see what you can do is now you have this as a standalone uh you know input you didn't have to like define the variables in the code here and there you go enter in whatever number all right so one two three three there we go there we go one two three oh that's very weird two three i got to one point two three ah look at this it see as i was mentioning it i didn't i didn't delete the one there and that variable was still in in memory for that little bit so it gave me this you know exponent that i was not expecting one two three there we go all right pretty good so anything that you have now now we have this standalone code and then later on what we're going to do is and then maybe i'll use this as an example is we can put all of this code within one function and so then now you can just define a function that will convert to scientific notation and all this code is within that function and we can take that and then that function we can use wherever all right so let's go on to the next one now we'll get to graphing exponents and logarithms so just connecting with the math natural log is l n putting the adjective first natural log if i was just writing it on the on the board it'd be l n and that would be base e and so comparing y equals e to the x and y equals natural log of x those two are the inverse functions and mirrored over the line y equals x so when we see the graph we'll see these and then we'll see the line y equals x so we were just talking about using the math library if i just want to calculate a logarithm i'll use math.log but because when we graph we're using numpy and we're using the linspace function to create an array of values that we're going to graph so i have to keep with numpy which i usually import as np so then i'll do np.log math.log as you see if i want to do one thing yeah that works if i'm using the math library i'll use that here i'm using np.log and np has it slightly different np has np.log 10 obviously base 10 np.log 2 for base 2 and if i just do np.log it's going to be base e realistically we don't need to do every other base because we have the change of base formula which i'll talk about in a second so there we go so we have the positive x values now e to the if i was graphing this e to the x i have my all my x values whatever i want but when i do natural log then the x value will never be zero because remember they're inverses so in this case e to whatever exponent the y value will never be zero as the inverse here the x value will never be zero so when i graph this hopefully this looks familiar from other graphing we might have done i'm going to define this and i'll just use this minimum maximum you know based on here what i did here that's fine but then when i do log i need i'm going to use a different linspace i won't do zero i'll just pick some like really tiny number 0.001 and that should be enough to illustrate this point so there we go all right so i'm graphing these i'll use x1 is my array of x values and linspace goes from minimum to maximum and then within that range i want a thousand points i mean you'll see for this you'll see a smooth graph even if you don't have a thousand points all right there we go and then plot x1 and i'll just write the y value here instead of separating it out math dot e for my e value and then that to the to that exponent there we go and i'll make this a blue line so then we have the red line for y equals x then x1 and we see if i have this x1 i just can put x1 x1 because it's y equals x so i don't need to define a new y value which i know it's the same and here now for my log y equals log of x i'll do this linspace and then np dot log x2 so there we go all right so we're just going to run this and then change it so we see i see this notate notation and there we go so we have the blue line e to the x exponential function and graphing that green line y equals x or y equals the log of x and there we go and this works for any inverse function there are mirror images across the line y equals x but this there you go it illustrates it nicely it illustrates it nicely all right now change the blue line and the green line because we want to make these log base two so here instead of math dot e i'm going to make this just two to the x you know that's fine and this one instead of np dot log i'll do np log two now we're not going to notice that much of a difference here because i went from a base of 2.7 to a base of 2 but there we go that's all you need to do for this one one i don't want to include some applications here if you have the hydrogen concentration as a decimal number that's really where the ph comes in so proportion of hydrogen so the way this this works it's the negative log of the hydrogen concentration so if we have 0.007 as scientific notation that would be seven times ten to the negative three which would be a ph of three and then we see that as we got more and more zeros as placeholders you know a really tiny decimal number then that would be ten to the negative four five six you know ten to the negative ten you know really tiny number and that really tiny number then ten to the negative ten would be a ph of ten you know we get the idea so that's really it i just just taking this and if you knew the hydrogen concentration i was thinking about adding this in as like going into the chemistry and finding hydrogen concentrations but i'll leave that for the those of you that want to uh you know pursue the chemistry angle on this but you can you could actually get you know various uh hydrogen concentrations of molecules and you know work it out from there okay but nonetheless so what we want to do is we just want the hydrogen concentration so it's the negative log and for this one i will use math so there we go so we're going to make this negative math dot uh log and i'm going to log as decimal ten ten there we go so that's that's really it and now that log i get that number base ten and what do i want to do i want the ceiling so i'll do math dot ceiling of this there we go perfect all right so there we go when we run this end of the hydrogen concentration and what if i put your point two three four and there you go and i'll put let's put the number five i could put a one there uh math dot ceiling yes so i would take this as we we look at this and yeah this is the function here we run the function as is and then do the math dot ceiling so that's what we'll do we'll move our decimal place and these are the things that i wanted to put in here as you know indications and you see we see why this this ended up being wrong because then it gave a ph of four putting the math dot ceiling in the wrong spot all right so i'll do the same same one here point i'll put a one that's okay there we go now that gives it a ph of five there we go now that gives it a ph of five you see how that makes a difference doing the formula first with the negative log then doing the math dot ceiling there we go now that gets a ph of five there we go all right so now with functions here calc these are some of the things how could we write a function well if you want a function you're going to define the function and calculating mortgage payments okay so maybe i'll call it mort pay and now notice you would think that it when i hit enter it gave me the indent automatically but for other things that i do or i might use this code i am all about the four spaces so i backspace i delete that and then i want to make sure i do the four spaces so what can i do i can define this function here so and and this is i'll do one and then you can see how you can do more here so if i have the mortgage payment now we also have our um table of contents i can jump right to mortgage payments so notice i have p r and t here and then i will define these in here so here so i'm going to just copy this and actually um there we go so i'm going to show you one way to do this and then maybe we'll do it a different way okay there we go and more functions here so one of the things that you can do is just put everything in here and i might just here we go you probably don't need that extra line and same here so this works as the payment maybe that's all you need you want to be able to then prompt for these things and then print out the answer so that works another way is what i'm going to do i'm going to copy this and i'm going to show you another function that you can do you can do and that one all right so mort pay p r t and for this one i'm going to require input input p r t t and then i'm going to not need these and instead of print and i'm going to return payment so this one's nice if that's the if and you know there we go so this one's nice if you wanted to prompt you know this could this could go a lot of different places but this one you can put this in maybe then just put this function in and return the payment like exactly where you know it's going it's going to go so two different situations and that's why you know i'll make it you know that's why you know i'll make it you know p r t so we know what the input would be and then this one is different so there we go so that's that's one one way and i have here more functions now the interactive polynomial graph we were working with that too i'm going to do one more up here because i wanted to show you the scientific notation so here we have enter a number to convert to scientific notation so if we have this uh maybe we want the number to convert so if i have a as my variable so there's my scientific notation there really just two lines and if i take that and convert this i could create a function to a there we go and maybe it just takes that input of a there we go and and return n so that could work too there we go so we take this and move around um um oh but i would probably have it as a string here so i could go back to that and instead of the print uh i could instead of printing it i could i could turn this into um there we go uh answer answer and so we may you know i could just make that a string and then return answer so i probably don't need this a equals uh and it should give you n times 10 to the x so just to give you some examples this is where i want you to be able to you create the functions and then the internet active graph with sliders we we have that so turn that into a new turn that into a function but here's the examples how you can just take and and that's the whole thing that we wanted to get to you know through this course you learn and you're practicing and then you're grabbing the parts that now you know and you can turn just the important parts that you're going to use later on into their own functions and you can you know give them other names you know here's more functions and there you go uh create a function for you know how long it would take money to double go back to that other one again turn that into a function and all of this is going to be in a financial app that you'll make so what you can do is you can have one display of all of these and you could have this work out that it's within all the code here or you could have it within uh within google co-lab where you have text that gives you like number one calculate mortgage payment number two retirement account balance number three etc you could have the text there and then require input which option do you want and then have all your functions so that's that's one way to do it defining all the functions having the text input that would be like the menu and then when you pick your option then it runs that function so that that's really what i want to get to is that you're putting all this together and it becomes your financial app so that you can use this for other things you know calculating your own finances and this combined with what you're doing certifications one and two see now where the goal is that you're getting to the end of this and you have understand the math and you have all these functions at your disposal you know calculate things graph things solve problems and then you can apply that later so the next unit which i call it week 15 is going to be the wrapping up and putting all this together so we reached the home stretch in our algebra journey here and now we're going to connect all the different things we've been doing with math we've been looking a lot at functions taking things that turn into x lists of x y values that we can graph and then now we're going to look at how we can get the get that data from the web from the cloud from a spreadsheet from wherever and bring that data in whether it be columns in a table or all sorts of information and pair it up in those x y coordinates and then we can do math to it so really that's that's the connection we've been working with all the math content and now pretty much everything we're going to be doing beyond this we're going to bring that math content and into the code and do a lot more code how can i into the code and do a lot more code how can i get this data turn it into a numpy array and then do whatever graph i can do and you know analyze the data so let's let's get to it let's get to the code so now this is some ways you can bring in data from other sources and graph it and do other things so let's talk about the other sources pandas is the library that really deals with data frames tables columns rows everything like that so we're going to import pandas import the matplot library we've done that before and we're also going to import from google colab we're going to import files and that's also going to give our file operations you'll see that and import io input output there we go i separate these out because you can run these once and you know this takes a few seconds i already did it so run it once and that saves you a few seconds each time because we want to go through you'll see test some things now we have all those imports here's ways that we can get the files all right here's one option if you have a csv on your computer you can upload it and because we imported that google dialogue or the google files all right so this is all we need files dot upload and we're going to upload that you know it'll give you that file dialogue you can search for on your computer and that's what the one you select will will store that as that variable uploaded and then so i have my file name because we have this we're going to take that uploaded file and iteration so iter and the argument is uploaded and we're going to go to the next one and what that is going to do is just one time you know you selected a file and we're going to select that and store it as file name and here that file name we know the file name and we know that it's a csv so pandas has this nice building pd dot read csv that's what we want to get to and don't worry about this it's because i already stored that as file name you can use this for you know whatever file you upload so uploaded file name and it reads that io dot bytes io and it will store it as this table so there we go these three lines from you know uploading something you know give you the file dialogue upload it from your computer and select it now when you run this when you select that file it's stored as table one awesome so we'll do more stuff with that table in in a minute here another way is you can get a csv from a url so maybe you already know you're looking at different websites and you found you know this uh url and you see this one um uh yeah this this guy uh seems to put put out a few good examples so there we go uh faithful dot csv old faithful geyser you know it rups for a little you know briefly but like on such a regular basis that's why it's called old faithful and that just might be some interesting data we can look at so i'll just store it as this variable url which is the exact address pointing right to the csv there you go plenty you could also and i didn't include this here but you could also if you wanted to you know make your own like you know input statement you know prompt you know for somebody else using you know you made this program for somebody else you could prompt somebody else to just copy and paste the url and store it you know that works too but you know this is your code so you just put the url here store it as variable url now same type of thing but here so we have pd dot uh because we imported pan does it as pd pd dot read csv and i just need to read that url and that's enough and i'll store it as table one okay and yes those imports and everything that you run i just even have notes in here to remind you so that's good for maybe 20 minutes google colab will uh have this runtime you're running on their server and you know colab has a runtime once we started this it will time out after about 30 minutes of inactivity or even if you're active like you know let's say you have a really busy day i think it's like about 12 hours of running it'll time out you know you could say well wait i haven't been inactive but there's still an absolute time out and then you have to start it again so that gives that gives you time you can import that and then it gives you time to go through and then run a few of these and tinker with it okay so that way you don't have to repeat those steps and again you know importing you know importing all those that actually takes a few seconds to run it and then prompting you know if we want to do some different things and test some things you don't have to upload it every time that saves you a few seconds or this even so there we go now we have this what do we want to do with it you know i have you in the notes we're going to eventually determine what columns we want and convert them to numpy arrays and remember numpy arrays that's what we're that's what we end up graphing so one of the things and i even still commented this out but you could display the whole table that might be too much especially the the more you get into big data you know that's that's going to be just time consuming resource consuming and so i i include that in there you know just to show you can do it but but what else might we want to do i might just want to print out so we've always stored everything as table one for this example so i might just want to print out the headers all right so table one dot head and if i don't put a number in parentheses it will default to five but i can put a number in there and it's going to give me the headings and i put a two so it's going to be that give me the headings in two rows that might be enough you want to you know let's say even if you've seen the column you might want to see the see it here or you know you got that url you want to take a look at it i want to see the heading i want to see the column names and i want to see two rows give me an idea of what kind of data because if i start seeing words in there then i know that i'm not going to be able to convert that to a numpy array all right another way i could just store column names as a variable because if i have table one in pandas that this exists table one dot columns there you go so now this column names is a list of the column names that's great um and again i can i only need to do this once and now that i have the column names what can i do with them all right instead of printing out the heading i could and i just put this here you know new line column names and then i could loop through them so i'll count them so a in range length range length column names so column names i'm going to get the length get that as range and then each time i'll print that number the space and then that column name that works that's one way to do it or another way i could actually just loop through those names call and column names and just print that each time so let's see what that looks like all right and so these are the benefits here so notice this is the first one we did uh there you go print table header and that print statement that head statement gave me these but this table also had an index column and notice their index starts at one so that's just something to remember and eruption length and eruption wait time so there we go and notice these quotes are within the with within the name of the call you know that's something the more you get into uh more you get into uh working with data and maybe other people you know creating columns and everything i'll tell you this you really want column names without extra quotes in them and without spaces but you know there's ways to deal with that we can do this but it just it just usually makes it easier for this stuff and for like some of the sql queries okay so now i get an idea of what i have and here again you see the column names you know index eruption there and the the other way we did it index eruption length eruption wait time so now that i have these exact column names so you know i could now this is how i did it here because i had them right here and i can see them so table one and then in those square brackets i'm going to put the name of that column i want and then also that name in single quotes to numpy so boom that'll convert that to a numpy array and then eruption length in minutes so again table one and then in the square brackets and remember that extra space and those quotes were in there so i need to make sure i include them and convert that to a numpy array so now i have my x and y values that i can that i can plot there you know going through each of them you know it's going to be you know my first value x is 3.6 y is 779 x is 1.8 y is 54 oh no actually i had it as index so x is 1 y is 3.6 x is 2 y is 1.8 i can graph the eruption length or i can do it for eruption wait times and i'd like to go back to the index again x is 1 y is 79 x is 2 y is 54 so i just graphed it for that first one and we can go back and do that for the second one also if you wanted to so we have x and y because they're numpy arrays i can call that function x.min and this you know if if you haven't really looked at like the entire table this just might be a good way i'll just take the minimum value minus five because it's just a little bit of a buffer on the edge and store that as x min x max same thing plus five a little bit of a buffer y min y max so this goes back to things we were doing a while ago with graphing set my x min x max and each of these now notice i don't have some of the things we were doing in other other units we were defining the points here but i already have my x and y values defined as num numpy arrays so when i graph i can plot i can plot them here as you know you know the x refers to that array y refers to that array and i can do a scatter plot or a line graph so i have these here as numpy arrays and i can do them as a scatter plot or a line graph all right let's see what this looks like now i had it as both and it looks like a huge mess but one of the things i notice is i i don't want the line graph is probably not useful so i'll just go i'll just comment that out right now and run it again and we see it seems to cluster it's around here or around here that's kind of interesting what if i change my x my y value maybe i'll keep all these points but what if i change this so what i can do is my y minimum and these are the things this is what we want to do now we know how to use your math graphing skills to look at this you know how to get all this data into this graph and this is now where we get to the analysis part what can i do i can look at this and say all right you know they're all less than six and they're all greater well actually they're all greater than zero so i can just make my y minimum zero and i'm just going to comment out the rest of this and i can make my y maximum six and i'll just comment out the rest of that and when we see that we might see it seems like it clusters it's for whatever reason it's really rare for it to be around three and remember what are we graphing here here we are graphing the eruption length time so it really seems to cluster around oh about two minutes or about four minutes yeah interesting so we can look at this and then one of the other things that we can do now let's look at another twist on this you can use variables for the column names so remember earlier we made column names this array so i can have column name zero column names one and that's my x name and my y name i'll make these variables so that also depending on the actual names of your columns doing that once might save you some typing because then you can reuse that variable here just yeah i don't have to worry about all the quotes every time now i have my x variable is that column to numpy my y variable that column just like we were doing before but again reusing that variable save you some typing i went back to this and we'll see why in a minute and i just want to show you that that same scatter plot back to that those original dimensions are there but you see using that as the column name i can also set the labels for the graph and again without having to rewrite so now we have index and eruption length there we go then if i wanted to talk about the eruption time or the erupt the wait time so all the things that we were doing i can just change this i still want the index but then uh column uh columns one was the eruption length i'll change that to that was the wait time and now i have those names everything else stays the same and again going to different columns that's why i like giving the dimensions of the graph based on that because these numbers are very different i'll still have the same index because they did match but instead of times between you know zero and five i will have you know wait wait time in minutes you know 40 minutes up to even you know almost 100 minutes so we see that now again let's get to some analysis here this looks like a mess it looks like maybe i have this range of 40 minutes to you know more than 90 minutes and this is key like let's say this is in yellowstone let's say you go to visit and you say okay how long should i have to wait it just erupted i want to go do other things when should i come back well should i come back in 40 minutes should i come back in 90 minutes you know that's a huge range you know could keep you you know waiting there almost an hour but let's let's start looking at other patterns here again the default i keep this index i want to zoom in on some range here so i'll go to that index that x value i'll keep the same minimum but what if i change that maximum value instead of that plus five maybe i'll make it like 50 and comment out the rest of this so that's interesting i'm just going to run this again doesn't help you but it spreads it out you see now instead of a scatter plot actually i'll keep the scatter plot because that looks nice but i'll also make it a line graph and i'll make the dots red and the line blue so look at that and you see that just looks nice and if i don't you know there's my y-axis at zero but if i don't want that then i can just make my x x minimum you know one that way and comment that that way i comment that that way i don't even get distracted by that there we go so we take a look at this now besides seeing the scatter pot that was a mess the line graph actually shows us some interesting things with very few exceptions if it was a shorter weight like 50 minutes the next one's a longer weight closer to 90 and then the next one's a shorter minute a shorter weight longer weight you see every so often you get one that it was another long weight but we get a shorter weight a longer weight a shorter weight you know exception longer weight that happens most of the time so what we can do is we could look at this and say oh well how long oh well how long was it last time and then therefore i can use that to predict and we get that from you know we get that from looking at the graph here so yeah really interesting i mean you could probably then now connecting this to you know real-time data science doing this then we could graph you know a certain amount of this and always you know have another table that always just updates you know when it erupted and how long that would require somebody each time you know just you know maybe even we could get this to clicking a button okay it erupted it stopped erupting and then do the calculations what was the wait time what was the eruption time add that new data and we could be looking at this and doing some sort of analysis to give people you know real-time estimates of it just erupted when can you expect the next eruption and get it down even probably to some like you know uh confidence interval that you know the that you know the point is that you would want to be able to say instead of should i get there 50 minutes later or 90 minutes later i want to be able to have i don't know like a few minutes um you know if it just erupted and it was an 80 minute wait then you know would it be you know 50 minutes so you get some range that you know when to show back up and you know you don't have to wait too long and that's really what we want to get this down to we want to look at these patterns and be able to then predict the next one you know that's really the goal you know if i go to here and i want to be able to predict and say oh all right at 50 that was a wait time of 60 minutes so i'm going to just predict that the next wait time is going to be more than 80 and if we really want we can just change this to like 55 so with the wait time of 50 minutes then the next one wasn't quite 80 and so that's like your range of well i wouldn't go i wouldn't wait more than 80 minutes i might wait almost 80 and it would show up so there we go because remember the other graph the eruption time it's you know three to five minutes you are two you know two minutes and it could be two minutes and you missed it could be five minutes that's not even that long so you don't want to be you know five minutes late you're going to miss it all so yeah just interesting we can use this to predict and again looking at the math of it we have we you know once you have those column names so once we have we get that table what once you have that table and we get table one dot columns we have those column names and then we can do other things with that whatever we want you know whatever we want you know number them you know just loop through them or then pick certain ones and i'll use that as my x and y so that's the advantage of then having the graph minimum maximum we can try this because we want to make this template that you're going to have this and maybe certain things you can comment out and certain things you keep in certain things you modify just a little bit that what you can use the same code for whatever graph you have you know whatever table you have this is a good start you start getting some analysis what what am i trying to compare what am i trying to graph and then as you get into it then you can modify it you know you can always then copy all this and then you know do in here then copy all this do a new code cell some text to give you know yourself or whoever read this some some notes on what's going on in this code cell and you know that that's the beauty of the colab notebooks you know you don't have to like you can delete things and retry things or you can keep that and then just you know oh this is this is interesting information keep that and then just do a new code cell or new text and you know let's do the next next analysis so here's another way to get data into colab and then graph it this particular library so not a csv but the full library medial stat it's a lot of weather data so yes may install need to only install once right once per one runtime and i just have this as its own cell there you go pip install medial stat to install the library doing that i mean this actually might take almost 30 seconds so sometimes that seems like forever so i already did that and here we go um successfully installed and then we go on to the next one and for your own organization or anybody else working with this you put put in some text areas here so now i know and it reminds me what columns i have in this library so time uh and all the other these other teasers temperature average temperature minimum temp maximum temperature the amount of precipitation amount of snow wind direction wind speed the pressure so average you know air pressure uh air pressure uh the wind gusts so uh after wind speed we have wind gusts air pressure and the last one is uh time in the sun so you know how many minutes of sunlight would you get and these are really good i picked these because it might be useful you know you can things like wind speed you know plan your uh wind turbines and where to put them time in the sun plan for your solar panels and where to put them um so i have these to remind me and then the reminder change start and end date time and you know point we're going to use this a lot so what arguments is this expecting point latitude longitude meters above the ground so now we have these notes you know maybe you set this up for yourself and you don't use it for a while and then you forget you know what you can what variables you can use so all this you know we can just keep this same i just have the notes here because we have from numpy we're going to import mean because we're going to use that and then the rest of these are from you know the media stat library we definitely want daytime plot and for media stat we're going to just import these couple things also it's just it's useful put the documentation in you know that here's the website where all the documentation is you know put that in there as a comment again just like the other notes for yourself or for other people good to keep track of these things so now we know what we're expecting we can set the time period and what i wanted to do is i just picked you know sometime you know one month in the summer start and end so i have eight time there we go year month day your month start and end and so the person who put out this one example online did this for vancouver so you know i just commented that out and i did one for philadelphia and i picked a random point in the middle of the city because it you know the uh if you want to click places and you get latitude and longitude he had a lot of decimal places so i just wanted to round it to two decimal places and see where you know you know in philadelphia in general and then round it to two dozen places and see where we got so it's a some random street corner in the city and remember that third argument is how many meters above the ground so i put 10 because this could be a wind turbine you know on top of a building and i wanted to compare this to somewhere in the suburb so you know it are the closely packed buildings does that affect wind speed well we're still talking 10 meters above the ground so this is in you know residential neighborhood that is probably above all the buildings but i picked a point in the suburbs and i picked a point that seemed to be like a relatively open field as something to compare so now i have these two points and i can get this daily data uh so daily so that's the function in in media stat and there we go i get this particular point you know these are arguments that point and then start time and end time and then we go to this daily data dot fetch and i'm going to store it as my data now we want to take this my data my data and which one do i want i want wind speed for this one and remember our function dot to numpy and i'm going to store that so now num data is my array and you see the these layers that we want to do this library requires this function here i'll store that as a variable now that variable uh got fetched that's also from media stat i'll store that but then i that's not a numpy array so i want to make that a number i want to take that calculate you know wind speed that column and make that a numpy array so i'll print that you know city mean equals and i wanted to get the mean to compare so now i have the second one again i'll do the same thing that daily function fetch the data convert it to a numpy array and in this case i'll do the suburbs mean but remember num data and num data too they're my two numpy arrays so i can use them to plot so we can plot the line plot the line there we go and and so i have this you know these two things i have you know the x value is since i know that i made my since i know that i made my start and end time you know 30 you know 30 days i wanted to make the x value there you go same thing one to 31 uh 31 instances because it includes the first one so there we go and then i can plot these wind speed and run it all right now i'll tell you why i have that commented out i'll tell you now that i have these because this works like uh i wanted to again connect it with the same type of plot you know matplot library that we use i wanted to connect it to that same matplot library that we've been using and show you that that's what you can do you know get those arrays and plot them here matplot.show but i commented this out this works also just a unique feature of this library um you can just take that my data dot plot and then in parentheses you know what the y value is so these two work so i just wanted to show you i'll leave them in there they work but in order to connect this with the same type of math and plotting we're using i plotted them this way and so i had it calculate and then just display you know the city mean and suburbs mean i could have rounded it but and quite honestly this is why we do data analysis this totally surprised me i really thought the average wind speed in this suburban area that was like a relatively open field would have been significantly higher and it was definitely higher in the city yeah interesting um maybe you know a little bit of a tunnel effect maybe there is some something going on with uh you know the buildings maybe that wasn't high enough also at least in philadelphia that city and if it's high enough that's a little bit closer to the river delaware river is you know any river gives off a little bit more wind and this was a little bit closer so that might have had an effect but there we go so then we see the mean but beyond that we can see the tracking you know day to day and you know they're still these two points that i picked are not that far apart so it tracks they're in the same area the wind speeds go up and down you know in very similar patterns but we see that not just the mean but at every single point that city location was higher so there we go and you know we could take a look now i made this so that's good and we can just pick that and we can pick like any number of days so i could since all the rest is already in there i could just pick this and say well what about over the course of the year so maybe i make that like one one and maybe i make that 12 31 and there we go so if it would include then there we go so 365 and 365 so i want to graph it this way so from one to 365 and 365 points if that doesn't line up perfectly then i might have to do one more or one less but we can take this and we can run this oh value error and it was 365 357 oh that's really interesting all right so 357 and 357 and so we can see you know the scattering but also i liked this now why what what i picked was uh you know not 365 days that seemed like that would be it i'm not really going to overthink that right now maybe there were some days that were missing but you know maybe that's not the pattern but you know maybe that sometimes that happens we go and we can uh go through and you know take out missing information or incomplete information but now we take a look that over so the day that i picked happened to be slightly lower than average so in both it was up a little bit you know 14 miles an hour 8 miles an hour and then we can see the patterns here so if this was wind speed you know the average then what you could do is you know you could count based on that average you actually don't need to plot it out because it works out given the given those averages you can work on that so if your wind speed is you know in the city and it's you know almost it's like 14 miles an hour throughout the year then you can look up well what size wind turbine and it would be actually relatively small but what size wind turbine you know would you need for 14 mile an hour winds and you can do some calculations given that size of the turbine how much electricity would that generate for you over the course of the year yeah so pretty cool and again you can you know you can do that with you know any other aspect of this the temperature you know maybe you know you're trying to plan something you know you can get uh you know temperatures just one other thing i did just was you know different so i can't i loop it through for you know a month just to show you and and all the rest of this is the same documentation link and what i did is i just made it a loop so you know range 1 to 11 and so that would be the month and i have you know what month there we go and you know there we go i think i picked just this because i thought oh well is that does that change and these monthly loops um yeah the way that the x value displays sometimes it seems like a little cut off but we can see we have you know wind speed and we can just see you know a few different months over the course of it and you see each month i have the mean and then and then the graph and and then the graph so we can just see it's just interesting you know the mean and the graph for each month the display it a little this might be a little clunky this might just be for your own interest or you could have something that displays them all in some nice little you know three by four the grid it gets to be small graphs though but nonetheless we see that there's times when the when it goes down so i just wanted to show you some of these things that you can do with this with this with this graph and you know beyond that that there's other ways and what you can do to in you know any other data you find if you you know you're looking up some things you might find them maybe it's a csv but maybe somebody you know put together an entire library and with that they not only have the data and then that's stored somewhere but you know somebody also wrote these so that you have all these already how can i get a point and how can i get all this different data from any of those points so things that you can make and things that you can find online that somebody else made you know different ways that you can find this data and then graph it so trying to give you some more tools now you know now that you know math and python and can use this to graph you know some more tools and some more sources of data so what i want to show you here is just a few more things that you can do right within colab and we already looked at over here on the left the table of contents that you can get to appear disappear then we have the search you can even search for directly for variables here and then we have this folder icon where you can click to mount your google drive directly and then once you do that then you can also see give it permission and down here we see it's mounting the google drive once you do that then you'll see it has the slash through it now so you can unmount the google drive if you want if if you wanted to do that so this makes it easy so this makes it easy to find things and move things back and forth within your google drive then the really big thing down here is the look at these tags you can get all these code snippets that are already in the google colab you see adding form from fields oh i want to add a form get the code right here you can copy it or even click it you know if you happen to be right in the place where you want to put it you click insert all these other things camera capture and notice this even uses javascript within python interfaces this so it's pretty cool again all these and some of these you know downloading files from google drive from github all kinds of things importing libraries that you know that are in co-laboratory all of these zip reader there's a lot of other things that you can do open files from github from your google drive from your local file system how you can just upload those so it even gets down in here into pandas data frame and that's kind of where we want to get our math skills too that we can take data from wherever well that's the pandas part and then bring it in and then do some different math to it what can i graph can i display it in different ways and that's what we want to take this to so what i'm going to do is you'll see below this video there's other code that i'll include but i'm not going to go through every one of these but check these out i mean there's so many different things already built into colab that you can you can do you know open up a sample you know and tinker with it i have a colab notebook i just call it code tester and i just have different things that i can go through and you know let's try this let's try that and then you know you put together in your notebook of stuff that works but here's all these things available and then i'm going to put together another colab notebook of just a few other things you know to tackle on this end of this class to continue you know some things that you can do with math and with code and you know we're building upon this leading to you know working with data and doing some other interesting things with that so check these out and you know tinker with them and enjoy wow you made it so now having gone through this now you should have a good understanding of algebra you should be familiar with all the key concepts and how to write the code to do all of your algebra you should have your at least one or however you organized it colab notebook that's ready with all of your scripts for solving all different sorts of algebra problems you made it through certification one two and three and you have the ability to solve a lot of different problems and you know write the code or reference code that you've already written to solve these problems so there you go you should be you should be all set this is the foundational math because it is the math that we're going to use and that you'll be able to use for so many other things in math including data science data science we're going to bring up formulas like this functions like you've been working on you know algebra level solving some graphing so now you have an understanding of all that and then you can apply it to other things for yeah statistics data science and a few other subjects too so if you continue on with the next step we will do a pre-calc trig that type of topic so you know some other deeper understanding of other graphs we didn't get to in in algebra because they're a little bit different other sorts of patterns dealing with locations of things and circles and more angles and a lot of triangles so that'll be something that we'll do next and again that's going to also build to help you with statistics and data science because as you represent data on graphs or use different sort of mathematical analyses to see relationships among data points you know the deeper math will get you to be able to detect more and more complex relationships among data so this is the foundation i feel like you have a good foundation hopefully you're feeling the same and there you go you made it and on to on to the next adventure 

Transcript for: Linear Algebra Course  Mathematics for Machine Learning and Generative AI
ready to learn mathematics behind machine learning generative AI or Cutting Edge teag then you are in the right place today we are going to learn linear algebra like never before in this Crush course in 6 hours we are going to learn the basics and the fundamental concepts in linear algebra a fundamental part in mathematics when it comes to many applied sciences our Crush course in fundamentals to linear algebra will be a great starting point for anyone who wants to refresh their your algebra and knowledge or who wants to start with the fundamentals of mathematics for AI data science machine learning or generative AI so if you are looking for that one course to refresh your memory in those fundamental concepts and be able to create your own algorithms and create your own AI dream products then you are in the right place and if you're really serious about your education and career and backup with your mathematical foundations then you can also check our 20 5 plus our comprehensive fundamental to linear alup course which is also part of our mathematics boot camp so check at lunch. and you can get this comprehensive 25 plus hour course along with the certification in linear algebra so here's what we are going to cover as part of our fundamentals to linear algebra crash course so we are going to start with the introduction to linear algebra we're going to talk about the prerequisites what is exactly that you need in order to get into linear algebra whether as a student as part of your undergrad or Graduate Studies or as a working professional who wants to learn the mathematics in a good way in order to become a well-rounded professional whether it is for your future in quantum physics in a future of data science machine learning or artificial intelligence so we are going to learn the basics of the vectors this is the first section that we are going to cover here we are going to learn the vectors their basic definitions the theory but also the examples so in this course we are not just going to scratch the surface we are going to dive deep and the idea is that for even for those basic concepts we are going to learn not just the theory the basic definitions but we are also going to implement them in different examples we are going to manually solve different examples by hand in order to truly master and practice this topic and beside this we're also going to talk about the applications of them across different domains including in data science and AI the idea is that those basic concepts are your starting point in the future of linear algebra because to truly understand this topic and to truly understand this entire linear algebra field at least the course the academic level course that you are used to seeing as part of the different Advanced mathematical studies you will need to dedicate more than just 6 hours so if you are serious about your education and career and you want to learn mathematics from ground up then check also our 25 plush hour complete fundamental to linear AR records to truly Master the entire linear algebra in a very economic and efficient way which contains an entire semester equivalent material Theory practice and the applications so here's what we are going to cover as part of our crash course so we will start with the introduction to linear algebra we will talk about this concept of linear algebra we will see what are the prerequisites in order to even understand and start with this course we're going to refresh our memory with the different fundamental concepts here in this introduction to linear algebra section we are going to quickly cover the prerequisite that you must know in order to get started with linear algebra here I'm also going to refresh our memory on the fundamental concepts like real numbers and Vector spaces the norm of a vector the cian coordinate system and also the angles triogen ometry the norm versus equid in distance pedian theorem Etc so uh after this we are going to finally Kickstart dealing your algebra Concepts so first up we are going to talk about the basic Vector spaces here we are going to cover the definition of the vectors what are vectors the basic representation of it but also the indexing of it and how we can apply different simple operations like vector addition Vector subtraction and also scalar multiplication after this in the next section we are going to talk about the matrices and the basic operations we are going to truly understand the matrices the basic definition of them we are going to see many examples of matrices and also in practice what are the basic operations that we can apply to matrices including the additions the scale and multiplication and subtractions after this we are going to look into the dot product and the vector length in this section we are going to talk about the idea of dot product what is the difference between dot product and inner product understand the fundamentals of that product and how they are calculated we're going to complete many examples as this a very important topic especially for data science machine learning in Ai and once we are done with this we will also look into this concept of the length of a vector and how this is related to for instance cosine rule and these different inequalities when it comes to the vector spaces after to this we are going to look into the basic linear systems how we can solve a linear system by using the infamous gaussian elimination here we are going to talk about this basic concept of solving linear equations with a many unknowns using the concept of matrices we're are going to see detailed examples where manually step by step by hand we are going to derve the um entire process using gin elimination how we can solve the system of linear equations first getting the arent Matrix and then this concept of reduce row form so RF and then R RF so row H form and reduce Ro form and uh we are going to look into two different scenarios to ensure that we understand this intuition behind solving this linear systems in various um type of cases now we are going to uh finish off uh the crash course with the preview of the advanced concepts we are going to see the special matrices we are going to see symmetric matrices diagonal matrices and then uh the idea of uh n matrices W matrices how they are used uh and why they are used commonly in programming and then we are going to see a glimpse of how linear algebra can be applied across real world scenarios so in this crash course we are not just going to cover the uh quick definitions but we are going to dive deep we are going to truly try to understand those concept those uh geometric intuition and interpretation behind those Concepts and how they are related uh towards many applied sciences so to truly understand how each of those concepts are actually implemented in the real world like in the fields of data science statistics and AI this course is perfectly tailored for working professionals who need to sharpen their math skills who want to uh quickly and efficiently refresh their memory whether is before their interviews or who want to learn machine learning and statistics and AI but they don't have the mathematical background and instead of just going and studying at University like I did and spending many years to do an undergraduate uh studies in mathematics or statistics instead you can just follow this course to quickly refresh your memory but if you truly want to understand all the concepts which is equivalent to one semester or linear algebra course then definitely check out our 25 plus hour fundamentals to linear algebra course as part of our mathematics boot camp at l. because you can't master linear algebra in just 6 hours so if you are a student this course will also be a good way for you to refresh your memory if you you are at the end of your deadline and you are about to complete your linear track exam and if you want to learn everything from scratch and you have the time then you can also check our 25 plus hour course to learn the linear algebra fully and to Ace your exams this crash course is just the beginning for you in this way you are laying a solid foundation to become a well-rounded professional and it truly understand this topic of linear algebra so if you're ready I'm really excited so let's let's get started welcome to the mathematics for data science and AI road map in 2024 today we are going to discuss the road map behind a topic that powers many algorithms the linear algebra we are going to talk about all the concepts and the topics that you must know in order to master the linear algebra which is the backbone of data science machine learning generative Ai and many other topics and Cutting Edge Tech whether you are aspiring to become a data scientist or AI professional this is your starting point to learn the mathematics of data the fundamentals or linear algebra if you want to become a good professional a well-rounded data scientist and master the art of machine learning generative Ai and many other Cutting Edge Tech domains then your starting point should be to learn the mathematics to truly understand this different mathematical Concepts that power the algorithms behind the scenes including many Infamous algorithms like the GPT series or the bird or Transformers linear algebra is the mathematics of data it's about the vectors matrices projections and how to solve a system of linear equations and how to decompose your Matrix into many parts to simplify the equations and solving of the linear systems think about metric factorization that is used as part of the recommended systems including the ones in the Netflix that uses the streaming company to recommend you movies when you go to the net so linear albra is one of the most fundamental and must to know topics when it comes to mathematics for your data science AI Journey so let's now dive into the road map behind linear algebra and how you can learn linear algebra in 2024 I'm going to make use of the curriculum and the road map that we have carefully drafted as part of our 25 plus hour fundamental SAR algebra course which is also part of our mathematics boot camp at lunch. so I'm going to make use of that road map and I'm going to also make use of the applications of lunch. a in order to Showcase you all these different topics as part of linear algebra road map of 2024 so let's di first we need to start with the linear algebra introduction you will need to understand this Concepts behind linear algebra where it is positioned in this entire field of mathematics and why you exactly needing your algebra to study so um first you need to learn the prerequisites and all this must you know topics that you need in order to be able to understand linear algebra think about the real numbers the vector space this concept of the norm of a vector the length of a vector the cation coordinate system which is usually covered as part of the pre-algebra or algebra courses and also the Angles and tri gometry think about the cosine the sign cosine rule the sinus rule the Tang function how it looks like when you visualize it the geometric interpretation behind it and also this concept of Al and distance and how Elan distance is different from the norm and finally you also need to understand this concept of Pythagorean theorem and the orthogonality so when it comes to the linear algebra one thing to keep in mind is that linear algebra is usually a course that is part of the undergrad studies like computer science econometrics advanced mathematics advanced statistics and usually the students of the studies they in the second or third year of their bachelor they learn linear algebra and this road map that I'm providing to you is based on academic level plus the industry Insight curriculum which means that uh the um uh concept is quite technical so if you want to truly understand the linear algebra and you are serious about your career and your education then this road map on one hand might seem bit Technical and intimidating but on the other hand you need to understand that students spend about semester on this entire road map but if you understand these Concepts this will open many doors for you and instead of just using the libraries of people who have created for example large language models like the gpts or the bird or the uh mixtur uh AI models instead of just using those libraries and pre-trained model you can create your own models and I think that's a good enough motivation for us to truly understand and invest the time and motivation to master the art of linear algebra so once you have these prerequisites that usually come from prealgebra or courses like the Calculus 1 and calculus 2 to uh learn these different concepts you are ready to go onto the first journey and first section behind the linear algebra which is to learn the vectors and operations so be prepared to learn the foundations of the vector s the special vectors and operations and let me actually go ahead and get more uh in detail curriculum for you so um start to understand uh the vectors and operations what are the foundations of vectors the fundamentals of linear algebra the scalers and the vectors this representation of the vectors in terms of the magnitude and the direction and also understand this uh Vector notation the indexing of the vectors first upop you can uh start with learning vectors and operations so here you need to understand this uh scalers the vectors the representation of the vectors like the magnitude and Direction what is a common notation of the vectors in the industry as well as this indexing in vectors so understand what the indexing behind vectors are because then you need to implement this in programming languages like python then uh once you are clear on those topics then you can get into the special vectors and operations so understand what are the zero vectors and the unit vectors the sparsity vectors the vectors in higher Dimensions the vector addition and subtraction as well as the uh Vector uh multiplication so scalar multiplication how you can calculate the multiplication behind the scalar and a vector also learn to um the different properties of the vectors and the operations uh of these vectors so once you are done with that get into the advanced Vector Concepts so learn the linear combination concept and try to understand this concept of unit vectors the span of a vector what is this definition and the application of it uh the concept of linear Independence is really important understand this concept and also uh be able to uh analyze and see from uh multiple vectors whether they are linearly independent or not look into this concept of scalar multiplication as well as the application of scalar Vector multiplication and look into this concept of a length of a vector and a DOT product as well as what is the difference between the dot product and the inner product after this get into the topic of dot product the coui squares and its application so understand the concept of dot product the inner product what are the differences between the two what is the properties of dot product calculate dot product by hand on many examples and also learn this concept of COI squs CI squs is an Infamous inequality theorem comes from linear algebra and understanding its uh Theory but also intuition maybe you can even derive the proof of it using the cosine law and how that relates to this concept of the norm of a vector and when it is that the norm of a vector is equal to zero so this completes then the vector operation section uh in here this is the high level overview of the topics that you must know in order to learn the vectors and the operations and once you are done with this then you need to get into the next section and the uh domain in linear algebra which is the matrices and solving linear systems here I'm talking about foundations of linear systems and matrices the introduction to matrices the theory and the intuition behind it core Matrix operations gaan reduction n space Comm space Rank and the full rank so here think about the uh General linear systems like uh the co efficient labeling homogeneous versus non-homogeneous systems and what is this uh definition of matrices the uh notation of it as well as this this concept of the rows the columns the dimensions of matrices the identity Matrix diagonal matrix other other special type of matrices like uh one's Matrix the zero Matrix but also learn the core Matrix operations and practice with them like Matrix operations of addition subtraction scalar multiplication and also the multiplication behind multiple matrices once you are done with this um in terms of the solving of linear systems think about Matrix representation of linear systems the solving of linear systems using the infamous gausian elimination like understanding this argumented coefficient Matrix the row H form the reduced row H form the identity Matrix and the reduced row H form look into the detailed examples implement this in uh practice with multiple examp step by step by um manually deriving the solution to the system as well as how you can calculate a new space a com space and the basis of these different uh spaces on an actual example once you are done with this learn this concept of the rank and in what case you can say that the Matrix has a full rank next up is the section of linear transformation and matrices so learn the algebraic laws of matrices they approves the determinant the concept of the transpose and the inverses of matrices and here this is exactly what I mean in more detail so a way comes to the algebraic Row for matrices learn about the cumulative low for matrices associative low distribution low the scaler multiplication low for matrices and look into the proof of this lws as well as the examples after this get into the determinants and their properties look into the uh theory behind determinants why we use determinant how we can calculate related determinant on an example as as what are the properties of determinants and the geometric intuition behind it so when it comes to the Matrix inverses and identity Matrix look into the definition the theory behind it also this non- Singularity of matrices and what is this definition of and the formula when it comes to the inverse of a 2x2 matrix and how you can go from there to a larger matrices let's say 3x3 matrices looking to the detailed examples calculate them inverses of the 2x2 matrices detailed uh in detailed examples and also do the same for the 3X3 matrices so how you can use this idea of conjugates and by changing these different signs to calculate the inverse of a 3X3 Matrix after this get into the uh applications of uh inverses of a matrixes why we need them what is the intuition behind it and where do we use it even when we are dealing with the very basic uh machine learning algorithm like um linear regression we use actually the transpose of matrices the inverse of matrices the multiplication behind matrices to find the uh solution to the uh linear system behind the linear regression so uh this is a very important concept that I recommend you to learn before getting into machine learning next up is the transpose of matrices learn the um properties of the transpose of matrices the U theory behind it but also the implementation and the relationship behind the dot product so once you are done with this the next St is to uh get into more advanced section which is the final section way it comes to mastering fundamentals of linear algebra which is this um different Advanced linear algebra topics think about Vector spaces the projections of vectors the grumme process the metrix factorization and look into couple of examples of Matrix factorization techniques that are widely used across the industry including the QR de composition the igen de composition which includes the calculation of igon values and igon vectors very popular topic as part of data science and statistical modeling also uh Ai and get into the singular value that composition which is the SVD so let's dive into the detailed uh details of this uh section when it comes to the vector spaces projections and the gred process look into the definition of it the step-by-step process behind it the uh projection formula and the step-by-step example behind the uh uh projection in order to truly understand how you can calculate the projection of a vector and also look into the geometric interpretation and the intuition behind vector projections uh learn the theory but also the implementation of the dotproduct of vectors and the dotproduct of a vector with itself look into the uh relationship between the dot product the vector of ve the projection of vectors and then look into the concept of orthonormal basis understand the orthogonality normalization and look into the infamous grme process understand how you can use the IDE of that products but also the projections in order to conduct this grme process step by step once you are done with this then uh look into the application of grme process and the auton normal bases so uh as part of these special matrices and their properties I would recommend you to learn the special matrices like the diagonal matrix the symmetric Matrix The orthogonal Matrix and the different uh applications and examples of them step by step once you are done with this learn this concept of Matrix factorization Matrix factorization is a very important topic when it comes to data science machine learning but also AI uh the metrix factorization different examples and techniques that um are falling under this umbrella of metrix factorization techniques that are used in both in machine learning but also in deep learning and in generative AI so if you want to become a true uh well-rounded professional in this Fields then definitely be prepared to learn metric authorization techniques dive into its applications understand the different examples of what kind of metric alization techniques are used in what uh algorithms and this will help you to get more excited and warm up for the next sections which are detailed examples and you truly understand at least couple of metrix factorization techniques so first up uh learn for example the QR de composition which is a matrix factorization technique learn the theory behind it the step-by-step process behind QR de composition how you can calculate the um q's and then the vectors of r so construct The Matrix of Q and then Matrix R and then uh decompose your Matrix a into uh q and then R matrices in order to decompose your entire Matrix look into detailed example the calculation of it uh with a stepbystep manual process and look into its practical consideration and application in solving linear systems after you are done with this look into the concept of IG value the composition how you can calculate the IG values and I vectors what is the theory but also the Practical implications of them where are ion values and igon vectors used for example in the infamous principal component analysis or PCA then look into this concept of ion de composition look into detailed examples and manually calculate the ion values and ion vectors as well as the igon value that composition so once you are done with this and you have looked into the applications of igon bi and ion vectors the calculation of it as well as the Theory getting into the final topic which is another Matrix factorization technique an Infamous one which is the singular value de composition the SVD look into the theory behind the SVD the left singular matrices the right singular matrices this uh theory behind them but also the Practical example behind them uh what is this idea behind um singular value de composition how you can construct The Matrix of s The Matrix of v and the Matrix of D and how you can decompose a matrix into the three different matrices by constructing them separately once you are done with this look into detailed example this might take a bit let's say an half hour or 1 hour in the first go to calculate this different matrices by hand but trust me it is worth it because you will then truly understand those Concepts and you will understand how and why those uh Matrix factorization techniques are used and applied in the dat science and artificial intelligence welcome to the course on the fundamentals of linear algebra my name is D Vasan and today we are going to start with some basic concepts that are important for understanding linear algebra linear algebra is one of the most applicable areas of mathematics it is used by pure mathematicians that you will see in a universities doing research publishing research papers but also by the mathematically trained scientists of all disciplines this is really one of those areas in mathematics that you will see time and time again appearing in your professional life if you want to become a job ready uh data scientist or you want to do some handson machine learning deep learning Andi stuff but also linear algebra is used in cryptology it is used in cyber security and in many other areas of computer science and artificial intelligence so if you want to become this well-rounded Prof professional you want to go beyond using libraries and you want to truly understand the uh mathematics and the technical side of these different machine learning algorithms from very basic ones like linear regression to most complex ones coming from Deep learning like architectures in neural network how the optimization algorithms work how the gradient descent works and all these other uh different methods and models then you are in the right place because you must know linear algebra such that you will understand these different concepts from very basic ones to most advanced ones in data science machine learning deep learning artificial intelligence data analytics but also in many other applied science disciplines so before starting this comprehensive course that will give you everything that you need to know about linear algebra first I'm going to tell you what we assume that you already know because linear algebra it comes from about third uh year of Bachelors um of different uh highly technical studies and um here um we are assuming that you already know certain Concepts so uh to ensure that this course stays really on the topic of linear algebra and that you uh understand all these Concepts really well for that we need to uh be able to know different topics so before we dive into these Concepts uh let's familiarize ourselves with the basic prerequisites and notations used throughout this course and you will really need to know this in order to understand this Concepts really well such that instead of memorizing you will actually just hear me once or maybe twice and then every time you hear later on or you see it in the papers or in some algorithms you will recognize um this is something that we already learned so uh some key prerequisites overview is here um first of all to fully grasp the upcoming material you should be familiar with some basic concept like real numbers Vector spaces so you don't need to know this idea of vectors though you uh already most likely are familiar with this given that you know how to plot different uh lines you know the idea of x's and y's and how to plot these different graphs but um here we are going to touch base on this every time when we come close to this Concepts I will refresh you uh your memory and we will go through this numbers the idea of norms and distance measures because when it comes to the vectors when it comes to the magnitude and all these different uh topics that we are going to discussed as part of linear algebra knowing the what Norm is and um what is the definition of distance what is the length between uh two points when we plot it in the two dimensional space or three dimension space those are all very basic concept that usually you see as part of a basic pre-algebra or just a common algebra courses and um lessons in order to truly understand what the new algebra is about to understand this direction of vectors the angle and then um the uh dimensionality reduction how linear algebra is applied for instance in different algorithms in machine learning deep learning data science statistics you really need to understand this Cartesian coordinate system so uh this is not only important for linear algebra but I assume you already know it given that you have passed those um uh other courses like uh calculus or usually they are covered as part of prealgebra or algebra so the cartisian coordinate system I mean here understanding uh what is for instance the the common um a description of them for instance when you when we write like X and then y on the vertic axis and then we can uh we have here zero and um then uh we can always plot this different plots you know we we have a clear understanding what is this um Y is equal to X line we understand how by knowing certain points we can plot different plots for instance that this is the Y is equal to X line that here it means that if we have here one then this is just one two this is two so we understand when we have the function of the line and we have a certain value that is our y coordinate or x coordinate then the corresponding uh coordinates can be found then um you also need to know um some basic things that I just didn't mention uh right now so for instance that the numbers here can be like 1 2 three up to Infinity so you understand this concepts of infinity and then here the same uh story then here we have minus one you know Min - 2 uh and then this is then used later on and we will be uh touch basing this one we will be describing our vectors and how uh we can visualize our vectors in a two dimensional space like we have here because this is two dimensional so we have X and Y but we can also of course visualize it in three-dimensional Etc so this idea of basic coordinate system is really important um usually covered as part of algebra if not pre algebra then we have basic triog gometry which means that you need to have a clear understanding what sinus is what cosine is what tangent is and their reciprocals and here I mean uh that you know for instance um what is cosine function what is sign function um you know that you have an understanding for instance that um uh what is this line you know um whether it's a sinus line or cosine line you have also an understanding what this Pi is um one thing that I didn't mention but it it just goes um around all these topics some basic things that you understand what is X what is why why we uh use them and this idea of uh variables uh and also uh you need to understand this idea of square uh or you know a 90 uh angle and then uh pagas theorem here we have the same so what is this relationship between different sides of a triangle that is a very unique triangle and that has one of the uh angles as 90 um and uh this idea of um you know the sides how this relates to the sinus cosinus tangent cotangent um and also um how the Pythagorean um Pythagorean theorem applies when we have uh uh triangular but it is no longer with a angle that is 90 what is the sum of all the angles of triangle so those are basic stuff that are com commonly covered as part of uh trigonometric uh lessons or part of General geometry so when it comes to this R so as part of real numbers and Vector spaces R represents the set of all real numbers so you can be dealing with for instance an integers like 1 2 3 this can Al this will also cover all the negative numbers like minus one - 2 - 3 but also the floting numbers like 1. 223 and all the other numbers that you can think of those are the set of all real numbers so this is in onedimensional space right so you can see that I'm writing just one number you know two three and other numeric numbers then we have the idea of R2 R3 up to RN where all these numers they represent in this case the N it represents the N dimensional aidian space so when it comes to this idea of n dimensional numbers so for instance R2 here we just mean 2D plane so I'm pretty sure you are familiar with this idea of for instance x-axis and y axis here we are dealing with two dimensional plane so for every point that we can find here we can describe them by assigning them a value X so coordinate X and a coordinate y that's exactly what we mean by saying that the number can be represented in a 2d plane so here we are dealing with this two dimensional space this is our two-dimensional Elan space and every number in here that is part of this R2 can can be pictured here can be represented in this visualization so for instance if I have this number and let's assume that the value on the x- axis is two and we can see here that the corresponding Y is zero I can describe this number which I will call a I can describe this by writing down first the x coordinate which is two and then the y-coordinate which is zero so I'm then saying that a which is a point with x coordinate 2 and y coordinate zero it is part of my R2 and it's part of my two dimensional alian space when it comes to R3 similar thing we can do with that only in that case we need not just x axis and y AIS but we need to add our third dimension so here for instance when it comes to the r Tre then we need to do y AIS we need to have X axis but also we need to have some Z axis so such that every time every point in the space we can then describe by x y and Zed coordinates so if we write it in terms of the vector something that we will see very soon as part of our first unit of this course we will then need to represent every number in this three-dimensional Alan Space by writing down first the x coordinate let's say one and then y coordinate let's say another one and then Zed coordinate which is one or even better even easier let's use 0 0 0 which means that we are dealing with this initial number which is the center of this three-dimensional Elan space when it comes to the nend dimensional or higher dimensional spaces it's much harder to visualize therefore usually when it comes to visualizations we do usually we us usually only visualize the onedimensional two-dimensional and threedimensional spaces above then it just no longer does make sense to visualize it but we definitely deal with them and they are part of Applied linear algebra so understanding the spaces is very important for analyzing vectors for their interactions and this holds not just for this two-dimensional and three-dimensional but really for multi-dimensional space let's Now quickly Define this idea of Norm so the norm of a vector denoted by this uh uh V which you can see kind of like similar to the absolute value from prealgebra you can see here that we have this double straight lines like from absolute value then we have the name of the vector or the variable name that we are assigning to our vector and then you might notice is here on the top of this this Arrow this basically says that we are dealing not with just a variable but really we are dealing with a vector this is really important because you can see that there makes a huge difference if we have for instance just V or V1 I have to say or just V those are really important and things that you need to keep in mind when it comes to linear algebra and trying to differentiate vectors from a point you will notice that when it comes to Norm we can uh represented it either by this notation or this usually it's a common um notation uh in machine learning or in data science um with this uh two bars and um when we do this we automatically also know L2 norm and this is something very common and uh usually used as part of U retrogression which is an application of um linear algebra uh and it's used in uh regularization so we are regularizing our machine learning algorithms so when you get into machine learning you will see time and time again this um notation so uh next time when you see this then you know automatically that you are dealing with L2 norm and L2 Norm which is also used a lot in machine learning it is referring to the usage of L2 Norm to uh in the uh read regression and regression or L2 regularization is a very popular regularization techniques as part of machine learning so right now even you can see this uh intersection of linear algebra or um this uh idea of norms in machine learning the norm of this vector v is equal to square roof and then V1 squ plus v2^ S Plus and all this in between numbers plus VN s so here basically it means take square root of V1 2 then V2 S Plus V3 squ blah blah blah plus VN squ so basically take all the units that form this vector and then so are on this vector and use them Square them and then add them and then take the square root of that that's the distance or I have to say the norm of this Vector we saw already the norm here is just a another example what Norm is and um on a specific two dimensional Vector when we have for instance that a vector is equal to three and four which means for the First Dimension let's say on x-axis we have three and then on Y axis is equal to four then the norm so this is equal to we take the x value so three and then we Square it so V you can see here this is the case when n is equal to 2 this is simply equal to square root for v1^2 + v2^ 2 and as V1 is equal to 3 so this is our maybe I can make this just V1 and this is my V2 then the norm or the equ in distance for this Vector so this thing is equal to V1 2 + V2 2 which is equal to 3^ 2 + 4 squ and this value is square root of 25 and it's equal to 5 let's now see the difference between aladine distance and the norm so you could see here the norm here we have just one vector like here and this Norm it has just two corresponding values into two dimensional space you see here we have just three and then four so this is V1 and V2 when it comes to the Alan distance this is kind of the generalization of this idea of Norm so the aladine distance between two points A and B in r n so in the N dimensional space is the norm of the vector connecting a to B so we see that the norm and the Alan distance are highly related to each other only we are talking about the norm when it comes to one vector but when we have this Vector a and the vector B this is simply the Alan distance so for the Aline distance we know already this idea of distance how we can measure it and you can see that this comes very similar to what we see here notation and here we are saying well we have this vector and then it has this two coordinates in N is equal to 2 in two dimensional space when it comes to the Aline distance Alan distance helps you understand what is this distance between two points in an N dimensional space so the aladan distance between two points let's say A and B in N dimensional space is the norm of the vector connecting a to B so for instance if we have a point a and we have a point B we are connecting this and this is the vector connecting these two points then the aladan distance is simply the norm of this Vector so this is the aladine distance so we can see that norm and the distance they are highly related to each other in the alian distance we are using this idea of norm and specifically the norm two as I mentioned before so here you can see that the definition of Aline distance so the distance between A and B the two point is equal to square root of A1 - B1 2 + a and then here we have basically A2 - b 2^ 2 and then plus A3 - B3 squ those are things that we cover as part of this dot dot dot and then plus after the last point when we have a n minus BN 2 so here what we mean basically is that if we have two points here is a and here's B and this our vector and we know all these different points so A1 B1 A2 B2 A3 B3 blah blah blah and then here a n BN we know all this points ly in here in this distance then we are taking them and using them to calculate the L in distance so here for instance if we have um point A and B so in this example let's do a quick one specific example when we have a point a which has coordinates one and two so this is basically A1 A2 and then point B with uh points in it like B1 B2 you you can notice that the da AB so the distance or the Eid distance of these two points which is equal to the norm of this um Vector but here this is a and this is B and this is this Vector this is equal to square root of 4 min-1 so it takes the B1 so this is B1 and this is A1 takes the square and then says Plus B2 - A 2^ 2 takes the square root of that and says this equal to 5 now you might be wondering but hey why do we do then instead of 1 - B1 2 we do B1 - A1 2 and the answer to this question lies in the um uh properties that we learn as part of prealgebra because it doesn't matter when we take uh A1 - B1 squ or B1 - A1 squ because this squared ensures that it doesn't matter which one we take first and subtract the other now the proof of that is outside of the scope of this um course is this is part of prealgebra but I just wanted to put this out there to ensure that uh you are uh seeing what we are seeing here because here it says A1 minus B1 but in this example we are taking instead depth uh B1 and we are subtracting A1 this is a common thing that we do in um pre-algebra and just in general uh in different um Alin dist or distance related cases so I just wanted to put this here to ensure that uh later on this is something that can be clear um from the first view why this is important this idea of norms and Equity IND distance beside of being used in machine learning and why is it used so Norms they provide a way to measure the size or the length of a vector in Vector spaces which means that when we want to measure a distance a similarity a relationship between for instance vectors then it becomes much easier to use this idea and El IND distance is not only used in regularization techniques like L2 regularization or retrogression but it's also used in other machine learning or deep learning algorithms as a way to measure the distance or the relationship or the similarity between two different entities those can be variables those can be two people that we want to compare in our algorithm or two entities uh um for instance the um Norms or the distance they are also used as part of K me algorithm something that you might have heard and if you follow later on the machine learning and the clustering section of machine learning you will see that aladan distance is used as part of K's algorithm that aims to Cluster observations into different groups so this also yet another highly applicable uh topic that you must know in order to understand different linear ALB top topics but also machine learning topics why this prerequisites matter and why I mentioned those understanding this concept is very crucial they underpin this geometric interpretation linear algebra they will help you to better understand these Concepts and not just to memorize them but really understand and later on when you go into your machine learning and AI journey and your data science Journey seeing these Concepts will help you to better understand those different all algorithms these optimization techniques what we mean when we say we want our optimization algorithm to move towards local minimum Global minimum this idea of movement this idea of vectors later on WE you will also understand this different concepts in deep learning how these models work how the neural networks work and those are essential Concepts that you need for solving different systems of linear equation a core part of this course they also help you in visualizing vectors spaces which are critical to understand this concept of linear algebra the applications of linear algebra when it comes to the real world applications so those are things that you can definitely Master by following some of our other courses but for this course I assume that you are already familiar with these Concepts right so now we are ready to actually begin and with this prerequisites in mind you are prepared to part your linear algebra Journey we are going to learn everything in the most efficient way in such a way that you will learn the theory you are going to see many examples we are going to learn everything in detail but at the same time you're going to learn the must know Concepts and I'm not going to overwhelm you with this most difficult concept that you will not be seeing in your career I'm going to give you this bare minimum when it comes to really knowing and the must know for linear algebra such that that you will be ready to apply linear algebra in your professional Journey whether you want to get into machine learning deep learning artificial intelligence data science knowing these different concepts in linear algebra you will be a pro in your field going to give you everything that you need the theory examples implementations everything in detail but at the same time you will be doing that in the most efficient and time-saving way so without further ado let's get started hi there so let's get started with our first module which is foundations of vectors in this module we are going to talk about fundamentals of linear algebra vectors we are going to make a differentiation with between scalars and vectors we are going to Define them so first we will learn the theory then we will Implement them into practice by plotting them by looking into different examples then we will look into this representation of vectors by looking into the magnitude and the direction of it and the representation of them just in general we are going to plot them in our coordinate system then we are going to see the common notation of vectors and indexing of them vectors are super important when it comes to linear algebra and application of it and uh they matter not only in mathematics but beyond so uh vectors help us in many ways from figuring out how objects move to solving math problems in science and just in general in technology including in data science machine learning artificial intelligence Etc they are super useful tool so uh let's start our journey with looking into scalers so scalers they are displ numbers and by definition a scaler is a single numeric volume often representing magnitude or quantity for example uh scalers can be describing um the temperature out side for instance the temperature of um a 22 uh can be represented by a scaler or a height of a person can be represented it's a scaler so let's assume we have a scaler that we will Define by a letter s it's just a variable this scaler is then equal to 22 for instance and we are measuring it in degrees so it means that uh if this s measures a room temperature then and the scaler s which is equal to 22 it represents the room temperature it can be for instance 18 or 9 if it's very cold uh it just measures a single volume it represents just a single number or it can be for instance 17 100 2.22 so all this they are just scalers they represent a single numeric volume they often represent the magnet itude or a quantity very soon we will see that scalers they are a value that represent the magnitude of a vector so uh now when we are clear on this very basic concept of scalers let's actually move to this idea of vectors so by definition a vector is an ordered array of numbers which can represent both magnitude and direction in space so uh vectors they are bit more they represent bit more than tailers there are numbers that also show direction like a car spitting down the highway or a bow uh being TR for instance uh when it comes to our previous example where we were using this uh uh room temperature as a way to uh think about the scaler a scaler for instance scaler that we just saw was this room temperature room temperature which was 22 when it comes to the vector vector is different for Vector for instance we can have an example when a bird for instance bird it flies flies at 10 kilomet per hour and I also add here another information which will make this as a vector which is that it flies s sou so here as you can see what I'm doing is that I'm not just oh let me actually remove this part to make it easier to understand okay so uh in this example let me write it down that the example bird flies South at 10 kilometer per hour so you can see that I'm not just adding the scaler which is in this case the magnitude we will see very soon the formal definition of it so I'm writing down the speed I'm defining the speed but also the direction so I'm saying I know that the bird is flying south that's the direction and I know also the speed of it which is the magnitude so thank you hour so here in the vector I have much more information than in the scaler because in the scaler I just got temperature room temperature single value but in case of a vector I not only have a magnitude or speed like 10 kilm per hour but I have extra information which is the direction of it for instance flying to the South so let's now look into some real examples and plotting them to make more sense out of this Ideo vector and what is this magnitude what is the direction so let's assume we have a 2d plane so we have xaxis we have y AIS here like usual we have our z0 Center and we want to plot a simple Vector so uh usually the way we represent Vector in tutorials or just writing down is by writing the name of the vector this can be just a a random name let's assume that it's a v letter V and then on the top we are always adding this Arrow so this Arrow it says and it tells the person who is reading that we are dealing with the vector arrow on the top is that reference so let's assume this uh vector v it starts from the center of our coordinate system and it goes to this point so let's say in here this is our vector V so let's assume that this point in here is equal to 4 which means that the x coordinate is four and the y coordinate is zero as the um uh Arrow it just as the point in here it has a a y value of zero so you can see that it goes straight from zero to this one to this point okay so what tells this Vector uh to us is that we have a value that describes the length of the vector so it goes from 0 to four which means that the length is equal to unit 4 so it's equal to four um and we have just learned and we were just talking about that the magnitude is the length in this case so the length describes the magnitude in this case so this means that the magnitude of this Vector is equal to four and then um what else we can see here we can see the direction of the vector which means that the direction is also something that we can see here this is the direction of the vector so this going straight from this point to this point in a horizontal way so independent whether I plot this Vector from 0 to for in here or in here or in here or in here or in here in all cases as long as the length is this I'm dealing with the same Vector because I am basically in this entire R2 space I have exactly the same Vector all I care is about the magnitude and the Direction Where will this Vector start and where will it end I am not interested I'm interested that the that the magnitude in this case the length is equal to the direction of the vector so let's now look into another example where we go a bit more difficult on our coordinates and on our Vector we already saw that we had this Vector where we went let me change the color so this was our vector v and it went from 0er till 4 so this point to be more specific is so this Vector it goes the vector B it goes from 0 0 to 40 so the coordinate X was four and the Y was Zero now let's plot another one um where the direction is no longer horizontal for this Vector let's call it Vector W and for this Vector w we will again start with z0 so we will start again in here but this time we will go like this so let's say we go all the way to this point so this point has a value for an X axis of three and for y axis it has a value of four which means it goes from this point to this point and this is the direction of our vector v so it goes 2 3 4 because this point is 3 0 and this point is 04 so xaxis is 0 x coordinate and y coordinate is four so now you can see that the direction of this Vector is like this while the direction of the vector B was like this and like in case of vector v i again no longer care about where exactly my vector dou use TS and ends but all I care is about its magnitude so the length and the direction so for instance I can have the same Vector in here the same Vector in here as long as the length the magnitude is the same and the direction I am dealing with the same Vector that's all I care so the magnitude and the direction is all that you care about all right so now about the length um that's uh something that you can see very easily from this specific example because by using the Pythagoras Theorem or P Pythagorean theorem we can see very quickly that as the length of this side of our right angle 30 so right triangle we can see that this side is three this side is four which means that this side is five because 4^ 2 + 3^ 2 then we take the square root of that a square root of 25 and it's equal to 5 so the length or the magnitude of this vector v is simply equal to five all right this was about this uh specific vectors let's now look into the uh common representation of the vectors so we always use the magnitude as well as the direction you know to represent the vectors and they commonly are represented by two different uh ways let's now look into the first way that the vectors can be represented and then we will move on to the next one so when it comes to the vector v so we saw that vector v was moving from 0 0 till uh to the point of 40 so we can represent the vector B by 4 and Zer when it comes to the vector w we can represent that uh Vector so Vector w we can again do the parenthesis and we can say that is equal to 34 so by using the coordinates from the coordinate system we can then represent our uh vectors so this is just one way of representing a vector another way of representing these vectors is by using this Square braces given that we are in a two dimensional space first we will mention here the four then we will mention the zero in here two so we can say three and four this is yet another way of representing the vectors in a two dimensional space so if we were to have a threedimensional space so let me actually show it on a new page so if we were to um if we were um to have vectors in three dimensional space so we are dealing with R3 so we have points that can be described by X Y and Z so coordinates space like this so X and then Y and then Z then every point so let's say we have this Vector then we had to represent it by a value let's say x uh X1 y1 and Z1 or um better let me actually use a different letters a b and c and this would be my vector v and I could also represent this vector v is the same so vector v can be represented as a b and c so what thing that you can notice is that unlike the R2 now I have three different entries what we are also referring as rows and we just got one column so um we can uh often represent and usually that's a common way of representing vectors by using this um columns so columns help us to to represent our vectors and you can see very clearly then when it comes to the two-dimensional space so when we have R2 so then our vectors have just two rows so three and four four Z like in here when it comes to a three dimensional space we have three entries and so on so the same holds of course also for for instance R5 then for R5 U our vectors so coordinate space can be for instance X Y Zed and then gamma and then let's say Delta and then the coordinates uh of a vector in that space can be V and then arrow is equals sh and then we would have uh let's say A B C D E you get the idea so depending on the space the coordinate space and the dimension of that space then the corresponding vectors can be represented accordingly so the vectors are quantities that have both magnitude and direction as we just so distinguishing them from scalers which only have magnitude so we saw that the scalers got only magnitude while in case of vectors we saw both for the vector v and for the vector w we didn't we didn't only have the magnitude so the length of the vector but also the corresponding Direction so uh when it comes to the um vectors so this is exactly what we just saw in our example a vector in a two-dimensional space so in r two uh can be represented by using this Square braces and the corresponding entries for exam Y where X is basically the x coordinate in our coordinate system so in our X and Y system whenever you have this x and y coordinate then uh this X coordinate Will then describe your magnitude and the y coordinate Will then describe your second entry that you need to put when representing your vectors so here the X and Y indicate the movement in the horizontal and in the vertical Dimensions respectively so for X's it's always the x coordinate so how far you move towards the horizontal Direction in here in here or independent in here so always take the x coordinate that is the value that you need to put first and then the Y need to be put it in here so indexing in vectors when it comes to the um indexing the standard mathematical notation uh indices in the N vectors goes from I is equal to 1 2 I is equal to n so the um notation here can be a bit ambiguous so AI uh could mean the E element of AI uh the a vector or the E Vector in a collection so let's start with a simple one and then move on to this next part so what this means and what this means we will look into now so um usually uh when we have a um n dimensional space we are having hard time visualizing it therefore we use this two dimensional space or maximum threedimensional space in order to get an understanding of what these vectors are so we just saw examples of them uh when uh creating our vectors in um V and V uh and W in uh R2 and also in R3 but we can have similar vectors also in R4 in R5 or all the way down to RN where n can be 100 200 500 any number as large as you want the thing is is that visualizing R4 R5 RN is very hard but we can still benefit from great properties of the vectors matrices and in general linear algebra in order to describe different things that have more than three dimensions therefore we have this a bit more ambiguous notation where we use r n and this n can be any real number and it can be all the way to Infinity so very large number and uh let's say we have a vector in this RN then this Vector is usually described Red by using similar Square uh brackets like before only with uh more entries so like before we got just one column so that's something that we didn't uh change but here we have instead of just two entries or three entries like in the two dimensional or threedimensional spaces now we have A1 A2 A3 all the way down 2 a n minus one and a n so we got in total n elements in our column and this describes our single Vector so this Vector in an N dimensional space this we can call also a so one thing that we just so is that it was saying in our definition and notation that uh we might also be dealing with the E Vector in a collection which means that sometimes you will see this while here the A1 A2 they are vector themselves so here we saw that these are just entries so A1 is a number A2 is a number A3 is a number a n is just a number but it's also possible uh when you have a much more difficult and complicated case that you got an A let's write it down with a capital letter A which is equal to A1 or let's actually remove this so we got let's say A1 A2 A3 all the way down to a n minus one and a n where you can already see what is going on so instead of having just a number as an entries instead we have vectors in here so our first element is actually Vector our second element is actually Vector so A2 Arrow A3 Arrow all the way down to a n arrow so while here this can be for instance some numbers let's say one one one all the way down to one one here we have a vector vector another vector and all the way down here yet another Vector where for instance let me remove this part where for instance A1 error is actually equal to A1 1 A1 2 a13 all the way down to A1 n one thing that you will notice here is that unlike in here here I got double indices so I got here a one1 and then A1 2 and then a13 all the way to a 1 n so the first index it doesn't change as I have here a one so I'm writing down the index corresponding to this Vector but the second index it changes per entry indicating which element specifically in the vector I'm talking about so from the first index you can identify the vector that I'm referring to which is A1 and from the second index you can see the corresponding um entry or the value that that um element is positioned in this Vector so you can see that this Valu is for instance in the um Vector one so A1 to be more specific but then it is in the first position this is in the second position in the third position all the way down to the end position so this is something that is really important to understand well because this notation it's going to appear time and time again across various applications of matrices and vectors so it is really important to understand well therefore I want to go one more time through this to make sure that we are clear on what this indices represent so whenever we have an index uh an a vector that we want to uh represent and it's um it has just um it is just a vector which means that it's not a nested vector vector in vector then um we can Define it by let's say a and then on the top an array and it's equal to and here we can have A1 A2 all the way down to a n so you can see what we are also referring as dimension of this Vector is equal to n by 1 so I got n entries and just one column so n by one which means that this already gives me indication that most likely this A1 is a number this A2 is a number this a n is a number so let's say this equal to one two uh three blah blah blah and then here I have let's say 100 but if I'm dealing with a nested Vector later we will see that this can be represented by a matrix then um I can also Define this by capital letter A which is a common way to refer to either matrices or nested vectors and then this is equal to A1 Arrow A2 Arrow A3 Arrow this already sends a message to the reader that we are dealing with no longer um constants within uh Vector but rather vectors in a vector and uh what can we see here is that the dimension of this nested vector or which we can also refer to as a matrix here the number of rows so the number of entries this elements we can see it's equal to n but then this time the number of values that form these vectors is no longer one because we're are not dealing with just a constant this is not some constant but rather this is yet not Vector so let's assume this Vector has a length or M so let's say this has a length of M then the dimension of this Matrix a is equal to M so something that we will see also when talking about matrices so let me actually clarify this bit more for better understanding let's say we look into one of those um one uh one other example of an entry so let's say we look into this specific Vector which is in the U the Third uh Vector within this Vector capital A so this A3 Vector so one thing to see here already is that I assumed that these vectors they got M elements and keep in mind that all these vectors they should be of the same size so it means that I already know that this specific Vector A3 has M elements elements so M elements so I'm representing this uh H Vector from here I'm taking this out from this entire uh nested a vector and I just want to represent this and now unlike this elements that got an arrow on the top this time I will have uh constants forming the A3 Vector so I no longer have vectors but I have elements in it so in here I will have a a let me actually write down all the A's but to refer and to make sure that I recognize that I'm dealing with the thir a vector so A3 Arrow here I will put three Tre all the way here three so they all come from the same third a Tre Vector but then their positions is different because this is let's say uh one two and then all the way down to Ed position so this indices help us to keep track what are the um position that this values are taking part in the vector A3 Arrow this might seem bit complicated at the moment but once we move on onto bit more complex material like uh matrices it will make much more sense this is bit of an extra I just wanted to Showcase this but this is what uh is at its core and what you need to uh understand at the moment to understand this concept of vectors so you need to know that vectors can be represented by this arrow on the top so let's say Vector a and it has let's say n elements then you can write the square brackets and then you will need to mention A1 A2 all the way to a n which means that you have n different entries describing your vector so you have A1 which is the first element in your vector A2 the second element all the way to a n which is the end element but here you can see for instance so if I had here a Tre that uh A1 is simply equal to 1 A2 is equal to 2 A3 is equal to 3 all the way to a n is equal to 100 so these numbers I'm basically taking and I'm representing them I'm putting them in here within Square braces in order to get a representation of my Vector so my Vector a has all these different entries and different entries and it starts with one and it ends with 100 this is a vector and then when it comes to the vectors within vectors here we need to be bit more careful cuz here we not just have uh constant values forming a vector but we have vectors that form yet not vectors so our Vector a our nested Vector a which we uh later will refer as Matrix a has actually enter that also are vectors so we have A1 Vector A2 Vector A3 Vector they are not just constants but on their own they are vectors so here for instance we have defined also an example of it we have said let's look into this third specific Vector that is part of a which is a Tre uh vector and uh that one has M different elements here we have then the index referring to the which Vector from the ne Vector a it is which is the third one because we have taken it from here but then on its own this Vector has different members and different members to be more specific therefore we have also an index to keep track of the position of this value one to up to M and this can be yet another uh this time it can contain some elements an example of which is for instance zero one 2 all the way to let's say 500 and this can be different numbers it doesn't need to be ordered it doesn't need to have a specific pattern they can be just random numbers describing this A3 Vector so hopefully this makes sense if it doesn't don't worry because we are going to see this time and time again I just wanted to give you brief of an intro such that you can uh remember this when we come uh back to bit more uh complex topics like uh indexing in matrices so now let's talk about about special vectors and operations here we are going to talk about zero vectors unit vectors the concept of sparcity in vectors as well as vectors in higher Dimensions like we just saw about this n dimensional space we will also talk about different operations we can apply when it comes to vectors like uh addition subtraction and then later on in the next module we will also talk about multiplication we will also be looking into the properties of vector addition after we looked into some detailed examples when it comes to operations on vectors all right so let's start with the zero vectors and unit vectors when it comes to the zero vectors you can see here already that um the zero and arrow on the top it basically refers to the vector like we saw before only with the difference that all its members are zero so you can see here that we have zero and then an arrow and then underneath here we have some number tree and then this is described by this common representation with the square braces and then three different members Z 0 0 so all zero and then it says in R Tre okay so why are we doing this well uh when it comes to uh different linear Lal operation sometimes we just need to add zero uh vectors or we just want to create zero vectors it's just easier here to work with we want to uh just create an empty uh Vector we want we know the length but we want to keep it empty such later on we can add something on the top or knowing that when we add a zero on a number the number stays the same we can make use of this property to uh do different um uh tricks when it comes to programming in Python in color or in C++ Etc so therefore this idea of zero vector can become very handy now one thing that you need to notice here is that we are not just writing down this zero to emphasize we are dealing with a vector but like uh before we have this eror on the top emphasizing that we are dealing with a vector then what we are doing is that we are also adding the dimension of this Vector so in what dimension in what space are we um uh creating this zero Vector that this vector is located is it in R2 in RN in R3 in this specific case you can see that in this example the uh index that we got here is three which basically indicates we are dealing with a zero Vector in threedimensional space so in the R3 uh in general we would just note this by n keeping the uh notation general which means that we are dealing with 0 0 all the way down to 0 so it has n by one dimension in r n all right so this is about zero vectors it is just a way to uh make our programming life easier also to use it in different uh algorithms when it comes to bit more advanced algebra uh the next type of special vectors that we will look into is this unit vectors so vectors with a single element equal to one and all the other zero denoted as EI for the E unit Vector in N dimensions are referred by unit vectors so uh what we mean here when it comes to the unit vectors uh if we have for instance E1 it means that we have a vector where the is in this case the first element is equal to 1 so you can see that E1 is equal to 1 0 0 so in the first element we got one and the remaining is zero and this is really important that we are dealing with vectors that contain only elements of zeros and ones and the only member that is equal to the only element in that Vector that is equal to one is the E element in the entire Vector all the remaining ones are zero and you can see here that the dimension is no longer specified but just the um index of the entry where the um uh the uh one is located so let's look at another example in here for instance when it comes to the um uh unit Vector yet another unit Vector is E2 which basically means that in the second element so in the second place uh the uh Vector contains one and all the other members are zero so here you can see Zero here you can see Zero only in the second element we have one and then in the E3 what we have here is that the third element is one and all the other ones are zero so let's actually look into uh one um bigger Vector uh in higher Dimension to make it even more sense so first I will Define and assume that we are dealing with a vector in RN so in an N dimensional space this gives me an idea that we are dealing with um so we are not dealing with nested Vector we are dealing with a simple n dimensional Vector so it has n rows and one column so using the square braces I'm going to represent my Vector so I have all these different members n members C so e let's say it is E5 so what does this mean it means that I is equal to 5 and this e element so the fifth element is equal to one and all the other entries the elements in this Vector are zeros so let's look into this is 0 0 0 0 I'm approaching the fifth element in my Vector so it's this one this is one and the remaining all zeros so this is a unit Vector in an N dimensional space and I'm defining it by E5 because my fifth element is equal to one now those are very handy when it comes to some other uh techniques in linear algebra and just in general think about techniques like um uh row ulum form solving linear equation something that we will see as part of the next unit so many things um we can do by using unit vectors unit vectors are super important so you need to understand this concept uh very well such that later on you will understand uh more advanced concept CS in linear algebra now look into the topic of sparsity in vectors so by definition sparse Vector is characterized by having many of its entries as zero so its parcity pattern indicates the position of a non zero entries so uh what we are basically saying is that if we are dealing with a vector that contains too many zeros we are dealing with a sparse Vector so uh this sparsity pattern indicates uh also the positions of a nonzero elements so um if we have um unit Vector it means that we are already dealing with a spse uh Vector this is a concept that is super important when it comes to linear algebra but also in general data science machine learning and AI because having the spity your vector it means that you don't have much of an information usually a value is zero it means you don't know much about that specific value and if you got just too many of zeros and too few numbers which do um provide information it means that you are dealing with a vector that doesn't provide you much information and there's always a problem when it comes to data science machine learning and AI so sparcity is something that you need to be aware of you need to know how to recognize it and you also need to know whe there's a problem in your specific case or not so let's look into an example let's say we are dealing with this Vector X that has five different elements so X is a vector coming from um five dimensional space so we have for instance an element of three in the first entry then we have z0 in the second and third uh entries then we have an entry um four which coincidentally also contains value four and then the last element in our five dimensional that Vector X is equal to zero now what do we see here we see that the majority of elements of a vector X is equal to zero because we got in total five elements and then we got three of it actually uh being equal to zero and only two of them containing information like equal to three and four so only two elements that are not zero so nonzero elements it means that three / to 4 which is is basically 60% 60% of all the entries in the vector X are equal to zero so the 60% it means that is above half so above 50% 60% of all the information in this Vector um the majority is simply equal to zero this type of vectors we are uh calling sparse vectors and sparsity is really important concept uh that we need to keep in mind later on so uh while we can visualize vectors in two and three dimensions in linear algebra like we just saw in case of this n dimensional vectors visualizing uh the this type of higher dimensional vectors becomes very difficult so uh this mathematical flexibility uh to work with uh this type of uh information so when we can represent uh information many with many entries we can represent it by vectors which we can actually not visualize becomes very handy for complex data structures for different simulations in physics and much more so uh we just saw in couple of examples uh how we can represent vectors in a high dimensional space using this Square braces and this common Vector notation representation we saw that in an N dimensional space we could uh very easily represent this uh very large Matrix or vectors uh by just um using this Vector representation for instance if we got a vector that had n different entries where n is for instance thousand so let's say we have thousand then uh we can represent uh this uh vector or this information by using common Vector notation so A1 A2 all the way to a th000 so of course we cannot visual ize this it just doesn't make sense we can visualize two dimensional vectors we can visualize three dimensional vectors but we cannot uh visualize thousand dimensional vectors so Vector that comes from uh r Thousand but what we can do is still make use of this very useful information in order to uh do different operations when and later on we will see that uh this property as specifically this part of linear algebra it helps us to work with vectors in any number of Dimensions whether thousands million billions this mathematical flexibility is super important for more complex data structures uh for metrix multiplications when for instance we are doing different uh algorithms including how we can represent a very large matrices very large feature spaces all this different information we can represent just by making use of vectors coming from this specific uh part of linear algebra let's now finish off this module by looking into some applications of vectors so one common application of making use of vectors is uh when we are performing different operations while having words and we want to count those words so this is a super common application of vectors and we can account this words and can even plot a histogram of how often each of these words appear in a document so a vector of a length n for instance can represent the number of times each of these words in a dictionary of n words appears in a document so uh just for the sake of Simplicity let's assume that we got um dictionary that contains only three words of course in the reality the um dictionary what we also refer often as Cor purpose it contains much many uh much more many words but for the Simplicity we will assume that we just got three different words in our dictionary so that's a total now let's assume that we got a document uh with these different words and we want to count how many times each of those words that we got in dictionary actually appear in our document so um if our document is described by this Vector so it contains an entry of 25 2 and zero it means that in our document we got 25 word one in our from our dictionary so in the position one two * word two and zero times word three so basically we have a predetermined set of words in our dictionary in this case three words word one word two and word three and they have a specific index specific position in our vector and when we are putting these values in here then the machine or the uh computer the program will understand that if we have 25 in the first position then the word one in the dictionary appeared 25 times in our document whereas the second word appeared only two times and the last word word three didn't appear at all so zero times times in the entire document so let's look into a practical example actually to make even more sense so um this is by the way a common practice to count different variations of a word they are common application in engrams large language models Transformers they are just a Cornerstone of many language models when we want to count the words in the document to understand how often the word appears because this gives us a idea what this document is about knowing how many time the same word appears in that uh document it gives us an indication of the topic of uh the do document also we can make use of it to do sentiment now to understand what this document is about not only in terms of the topic but also is it a positive is it a natural or a negative uh document so to say so uh for instance if we got uh the following words uh that correspond to our dictionary and in our dictionary we got just um let's say six different words then what we can do is that we can say 3 2 one let's say 0 4 2 and the corresponding words are word row number horse e and then document what this means is that we have a text what we refer as a document that contains three times the word word that contains two time the word row contains one time the word number zero times the word horse and four times the word eel and two times the word document so uh this is basically a common way representing the uh frequency of the words in the document let me actually give you uh another example and in here I want to emphasize another thing the concept of stop words so uh let's say I make this 10 and then here I say there is a three times the word I two times the word uh reading two times the word library four times the word book zero times the word shower and 10 times the word uh so uh you can see a that in here we are dealing with a document that contains 10 times the word uh which is what something that we refer as a stop word so those are things that actually don't give us too much information about what the document is about because uh it's just used everywhere but it is appearing too often so you can see 10 times the most frequently appearing word this is what we refer as a toop word and then another thing that we can observe the second thing we can observe is that we are dealing most likely with a document that describes library reading uh because you see the words like reading you see the word like book library but another word shower that is totally unrelated to reading book or library is appearing zero times so even by looking at discounts we can already get an idea what a topic of this document is about so uh you can see already now from this very basic example where I made too many assumptions regarding how small the the uh dictionary should be uh you can even see now how we can use this counts in our dictionary from our text in order to get idea about the topic of the document or topic of the conversation it can be a topic of the uh tweets if you have a tweet data it can be topic uh regarding book if you have many book um uh book text it can be for instance the topic of of the review if you got uh product reviews from uh Amazon for instance using this count can help you to get a topic regarding topic from that text then you can also use it to remove the stop words because usually the stop words are the most frequently appearing words it can also give you an idea about the sentiment for instance here we are dealing with natural sentiment it's not positive it's not negative it's just reading a book in library that kind of topic so all this can be super helpful when it comes to natural language processing that's a field where this uh text processing text cing and then using that for modeling purposes is what uh what plays a central role it also plays a super important Ro in the large language models in the Transformer models and uh in the simple matters like uh back of words or uh in the uh tfidf all this they are based on this idea of counting words and how we can use this information and you can see how vectors come into play in this different applications of linear algebra in data science natural language processing in artificial intelligence in machine learning so they are super important another application of vectors can be representing customer purchases for example an N Vector p so let's say p can record a customer purchases over time with pi being the quantity or dollar value of an item I now what does this mean so let's say we have Vector P that represents the customer purchases and we are dealing with a single customer and we are just saving over time that information how many time this customer has made purchases over time so the quantity is in the um dollars so the dollar value of item I purchase so we are basically keeping track of what is the value of the item I that the customer has purchased so what we can do is we can assume that in here actually it already Mak that assumption it says n Vector which means that the number of rows or number of um items that the C Custer purchases is n now what the um the problem says that it represents is that in each entry and here we have in total n entries we got a dollar value of item I which means that here if I have P1 P2 all the way to PN and here somewhere in the middle I got Pi in the east position it means Pi represents the value of item I so for example if I'm dealing with a CER that buys um let's say uh courses and uh the first item that the customer is buying is a mathematics course so I'm writing mathematics course and this is the first course that it buys e is by the way just a um way to refer to the E purchase so let's say um here somewhere in the middle the um customer decides to buy a deep learning course deep learning learning course and then it continues by buying uh the customer continues buying courses and the last course that the customer buys is let's say um career coaching course now let's say the mathematics course cost uh around $1,000 let's say the uh deep learning course costs $3,000 and then let's say the career coaching service which is usually one of the most applied and personalized one can cost all the way to $5,000 now we see that in the East position this is the East position let me change the color by the way so let's say this is the East position this is the first position and this is the last position so those are just indices we can see that in the East position we got the 3,000 which means that the p e is equal to $3,000 so this indicates that in the East purchase the customer purchased deep learning course and the value of that item was equal to $3,000 all right so now we are ready to go on to next major topic which is about vector addition and subtraction so we are going to do some operations and apply this operations to vectors so let's first formally Define this ideal of vector addition so uh two vectors of the same size are added by adding their corresponding elements the result is a vector of the same size so uh let's unpack this it says two vectors of the same size are added by their corresponding elements so here it refers to two different vectors let's say vector v and Vector W and it says let's add them what we refer as vector addition and says for that what we need to do is to take all the elements of v and then all the elements of w and using their corresponding elements so indices that helps us to understand where those elements are located we are using in order to add each element in the vector v to the element of the vector W in the same position and do note that in the second part it says the result is a vector of the same size because we are adding two different vectors of the same size mentioning here it means if we add two different vectors to the same uh that have the same size we are going to end up with a vector that has the same size now once I go into to the examples it will make much more sense let's quickly also look into this concept of subtraction so on its own a substraction is very similar to this idea of addition so if we have a substraction let's say we have vector v We substract Vector W then we are doing basically uh what we just did to the addition only instead of uh doing add we are doing substract so again we are just uh we are just substracting from vector v v Vector W they have the same size so we end up having the result which is a vector of the same size only one thing that you can see is that this can be also re written as V Vector plus and then minus W so we basically can represent substraction um on its own as a way of adding only we take the negative so the um opposite directed back Vector so this will make even much more sense uh once we go on to the examples so let's look into our first operation example where we are adding two different vectors this a basic example we got just two dimensional two vectors we got Vector a that has entries 2 three and Vector B that has entries 1 4 and what we are doing is that we are adding Vector a to Vector B we just learned that a we need to have the same size of vectors so you can see that Vector a has a dimension 2x one vector B has a dimension of 2x one so their sizes is the same both they got two entries only two elements and at the same time we just learned that what we need to do is to take their corresponding elements and add them to each other now what does this mean it means that we take from a the first element to and then we take the first element of the second Vector which is the B so we take the two from here and one from here the first element of a and the first element of B and then we are adding them to each other 2 + one is equal to three and then the same holds for the second and Tre so three which is the second element of vector a and then 4 which is the second element of vector B we are saying 3 + 4 is = to 7 so let me write it down even in a simpler manner such that it will make much more sense so Vector a has elements to three in the first element we got two in the second element we got three so a then we want to add B which has in the first element element equal to 1 and the second element is equal to four this means that if we want to add this vectors 2 3 + 1 4 this is equal to we need to take two we need to add one so this element and this element and then we need to take three we need to add to four so this one and this one which is equal to 2 + 1 is equal to 3 3 + 4 is equal to 7 so we got a vector 37 do note that this Vector the result Vector contains again two elements and just one column so 2 by 1 so you notice that the sign that the size is the same of this result Vector now let's actually generalize this concept before moving on to the next example so if we got let's say Vector a that contains n elements A1 A2 all the way down to a n and it is from n dimensional space and we got Vector B that also has an element so remember that they both need to have the same size so B1 B2 all the way to b n so they come also so B comes also from n dimensional space so then when we add a to B this is equal to A1 A2 all the way to a n plus B1 B2 all the way to BN so n by 1 n by one the sizes this is equal to let me actually use this color to make it even more visible so I for the first entry for my result Vector I will get A1 + B1 then A2 + B2 so all the way down onto the end element which is a n plus let me use a different color A1 B1 B2 b n so you can notice now in general terms what we are doing here so we are taking the A1 coming from the vector a we are adding in the same uh position the value that comes from Vector B which is B1 we are saying take the a1+ B1 this is the uh first element so the position stays the same and then in the result Vector so we take all the corresponding values that are have the same position in the corresponding Vector first from Vector a and then Vector B we are adding them and this forms our new vector and this new Vector will again have a size n by one so you can see that a the sizes of the two vectors are the same both have n elements and then we are using their corresponding elements to add them to each other element wise and then we are getting the result that has the same size so n by 1 so this is a more General description of how you can add two vectors let's now look into this specific example so we have a vector with the entry 073 so this comes from R3 you can see so three dimensional vectors the second Vector is 1 2 0 and then the final result is 1 193 so how we got this we took 0 we added one 7 we added two and then three we added zero so you can see all these elements element Y and then this is equal to 0 + 1 is 1 7 + 2 is 9 and then 3 + 0 is 3 exactly what we got here so again the same sizes and the result is from the same size so quite straightforward now when it comes to the vector substruction what are we doing that um so what are we doing here so we are doing kind of very similar thing we are taking this element one we are subtracting the other one in this first element then we are taking the nine in the second position and subtracting this again from the second position of the second vector and we are putting in here 1 and then 1 - 1 is equal to 0 9 y - 1 is equal to 8 so we get result Factor 08 like in here and you can you can see that the sizes stay the same so also in this case let's write more General um this ideal of subtraction if we got a vector a from RN so n dimensional space and it can be represented by A1 A2 all the way down to a n so it has n elements n by one and then we got B also for from RN so coming from the uh n dimensional space which means that it got n elements so B1 B2 all the way down to BN again with the same size n by one then a minus B is simply equal to a A1 let me actually use the same colors to make it easier to follow so let me first draw my Square races and then here I will use blue for a and then red for the uh color for second Vector which is B here I will use black minus then given that the same size should be for the result Vector I already know that I expect n different elements for this and then here I'm taking this first element that comes from Vector a i subtracting from this the first element that comes from Vector B so element y subtraction B1 and I'm already getting the result for the first element in my result Vector so you can see A1 minus B1 I'm taking this element and this element and subtracting them from each other to get A1 minus B1 and then the same holds for all the other values only coming from different elements from Vector a subtracting from this the corresponding values element Wise from the vector B so B2 B3 all the way to a n so you can see that in my result Vector a vector minus B Vector in the first element I get A1 - B1 then A2 - B2 then A3 - B3 in the third element all the way down to the end element which is equal to oh this should be b a n minus BN so um this already should makes uh much more sense so every time we take the element in the same position from one vector than the other we subtract from each other in order to get the corresponding element in the final Vector all right so let's now uh before moving on to the properties um I wanted to show you um this only in a coordinate space so what this means in terms of visualization in a coordinate space so uh let's say we have a coordinate space this is my Y axis this is my x axis so this is X and the Y and this is my Center so 0 0 and what I'm doing here is simply I want to have Vector a let's say this is just um Vector a simple one with the coordinates um let's say four and minus 2 and I got Vector B let me use a different color Vector B that has coordinates let's say minus four and four so let's actually visualize them let's first start with the vector a uh which has a x value of four three and 4 1 2 3 and 4 and the Y value - 2 so this is my Vector a and let's now visualize the vector B so minus 4 and 4 which means that let me actually extend this this is min -4 so the x coordinate is min -4 so it should be here and then the y coordinate is four so 1 2 3 and 4 it's this one which means that my Vector B is this one all right so you can can see now that the vector a is in here and the vector B is in here now what I want to do is to add these two vectors to each other so what I want to do is to take this Vector a and add to this the vector B which is is equal to 4 - 4 was 0 and then - 2 + 4 is equal to 2 so 0er and then two it is zero and two two so this is my result Vector so now when we are clear on how we can add vectors how we can perform these different operations and what it means in practice when it comes to looking at the vectors in a cordant space and adding them or subtracting them we are ready to look into the properties of vector additions so this is something that will definitely seem familiar to you uh from pre-algebra where we are basically using all these properties that we already know that holds for uh numeric values for the scalers that being transferred to this Vector space so we are going to talk about this four different properties that the vectors have the first one is the cumulative property which says that if we add a vector a to Vector B then this is the same as adding a vector B to Vector a so basically the order of the vectors doesn't really matter when it comes down to adding them so formally a plus b is equal to B + a for any vectors A and B of the same size then we have associative property which says A + B + C is equal to a + b + C we can write both us A + B + C now what does this mean we know from pre-algebra that this parenthesis means first do this addition and then do the rest of operations in here it basically says if you add add a to the B first and then you add the C is the same as first you add B to the C and then on the top of that you add the vector a so then the third property is addition of zero vectors which says if we add a zero Vector to Vector a then this is equal to adding a vector zero to a and this is equal to Vector a so adding the zero Vector has basically no impact act on the vector whatsoever then the final property is subtracting a vector from itself which means if we take the vector we subtract the same Vector from itself so a minus a and we get a zero Vector so a minus a is equal to zero vector and this heals the zero Vector now let's look into each of those properties one by one and let's uh look into specific examples uh in some cases we will prove this on the example that we have to make this Concepts much more clear so let's start with this cumulative property of vector additions so we want to see whether a plus b is equal to B + a so let's say we have a vector a that has coordinates or magnitude and direction that is equal to one and two then we have a vector uh let's say B that has a magnitude and direction of Min - 2 and three so the first thing that we want to check is indeed whether the A + B is equal to B + a so therefore let's first calculate this part and then we will calculate this part that I will Define by one and two and we will see whether we are indeed having the same value the same vector or not so let's see so we have here a so A + B which is the first value that we want to calculate a + b is equal to 1 2 + - 23 and we learned before that this is simply equal to take this value and then add this one so 1 + - 2 and then 2 + 3 so this gives us a Vector 1 - 2 is = - 1 and 2 + 3 is = 5 so we get that A + B is equal to -5 this Vector now let's look at the second quantity so B Vector B plus Vector a this is equal to - 2 3 + 1 2 and this is equal 2 - 2 + 1 and then 3 + 2 this gives us - 2 + 1 is = to -1 and 3 + 2 is = to 5 so we can already see from here that the quantity one is indeed equal to quantity 2 which proves that indeed the A + B is equal to B + a what this basically means is that adding two different vectors the direction or the order is not important whether you add a on the top of the b or B to a it doesn't M at the end is the same and actually you can also see it if you uh combine this or if you do this in a more general terms so let's say if we have a vector a which is equal to in an N dimensional space A1 A2 up to a n so it has n by one dimension and you have a vector B with the same size from the same RN dimension and it has elements B1 B2 up to BN and the dimension is equal to n by one then if we calculate first A+ B and this is equal to Simply A1 + B1 A2 + B2 up to a n + BN and if you calculate the second uh amount which is B plus a and this is equal to B1 + A1 B2 + A2 up to bn+ a n you can see that A1 + B1 is equal to B1 + A1 simply from prealgebra you know that if those are all constants for inance 2 + 3 is = to 3 + 2 in the same way a 2 + B2 is equal to B2 + A2 and then here up to a n + BN is equal to BN + a n what this means is that all these elements they are basically the same which means that we already have a proof so we get this proof and we can see that even for the general term independent what this Vector a is what this Vector B is that a + b is equal to B plus a this is exactly what we saw before in the first property which is called commutative property of the vectors that A+ B is equal to B + a now let's move on to the other property which is called associative property of the vectors now what this property does and says is that a plus b so first we do this plus C is equal to a + b + C and this is then equal to a + b plus C now let's then see um this specific property on an actual example so what is basically says is that if we have this example where a is equal to actually I had this before let me simply just remove this part let's then add our third Vector which is C and let's call it let's say it has a representation of four and five then the idea behind this property is that what we need to prove here that a plus b within the parentheses plus C is equal to a plus B+ C and then this is equal to a + b plus C so let's see actually whether this is indeed true for this specific case now this should come very intuitive so I'm going to do it very quickly so first we have this quantity this one then we have this one and the third one let's do it very quickly so A + B plus C is equal to one2 plus and then we at C so it is simply 4 five and then this is equal to we saw before when doing this that we were getting 1 - 2 2 + three and then we add this four five this is simply equal 2 1 - 2 is -1 and 2 + 3 is 5 + 4 5 now given that it doesn't really matter no longer that do we have uh here parenthesis or not this basically means that this volue is simply equal to -1 + 4 so here - 1 + 4 here 5 + 5 so this is then equal to 3 and then 10 all right let's then now quickly do the second amount which says first add the vector B to Vector C and only then add the vector a on the top what this means is that we need to take one two this is Vector a and and we will only add this once we have added the minus 23 the vector B plus to the vector 4 5 okay so we can see that we are just leaving this in here let's first add this two - 2 + 4 3 + 5 so this gives us one two plus - 2 + 4 is uh 2 and then 3 + 5 is 8 so this gives us let me remove this calculations so this gives us 1 + 2 is = to three and then 2 + 8 is = to 10 okay great so now we got already the quantity one being equal to quantity two let's check whether this is all equal to this one it should already be um something that you see now given that um we know just from mathematics that parenthesis doesn't really matter when it comes to the scalers and adding two vectors is basically very close to this idea of edited property um of the edited property of the scalers but just let's quickly do it to be 100% sure so when we take this Vector a to the B and to the C we had all this this is equal to one two added to minus 2 three and then added this to 4 and five now what this is equal to let me actually write this in bit shorter way such that it can be all fit in in the small place so 1 two + - 2 3 plus 45 this is equal to basically 1 - 2 + 4 and then 2 + 3 + 5 now what is this number 1 - 2 + 4 is simply equal to 1 - 2 is = to -1 and then + 4 is = to 3 so first element is 3 2 + 3 + 5 is = to 5 + 5 which is equal to 10 perfect so now we get the confirmation thatting the A + B + C is = to A + B + C is = to A + B + C so let's quickly also look into this addition of zero vector and the substracting a vector from itself properties and uh the detailed explanation of this or example of this I will leave it to you so when it comes to this a plus um 0 is equal to 0 + a is equal to a so this property let's say if a is equal to this 23 and then we are adding on this a plus some zero Vector which basically means take two tree and then added the same size of zero Vector you can see that this is the same as adding this zeros on these values now what do we get we get that this is equal to 2 + 0 is 2 and then 3 + 0 is 3 there we go so we already see very quickly that it doesn't really matter whether we add a zero Vector to this original a vector or not we in all cases it just adding a zero Vector has no effect and seeing from the commutative property that a plus b is equal to B+ a we already know that if um a + 0 is equal to uh a and is equal to this then also 0 + a will be the same and we can see indeed that we just saw that a + 0 is simply equal to a so we basically have quickly proven all this now when it comes to the subtracting Vector from itself I think this is a very nice one just to see how we um uh take the same vector and subtract from that value and we get zero and this is very similar to working with just real numbers in the same way as 3 - 3 is equal to Z also when we have a vector consisting of the scalers like a is equal 2 23 in the same manner if we take this a and we subtract it from itself so a minus a then what we will get is 23 minus 23 and this will give us 2 - 2 is z and then 3 - 3 is z so we get a vector zero so zero Vector so now when we are clear on how we can perform different operations on our vectors and also we know uh what are the properties of uh adding and subtracting uh different vectors we are ready to move on to a bit more advanced topics so uh in this module we are going to discuss this idea of scalar multiplication we're going to look into the example how what happens and how we can do the uh Vector multiplication with the scaler then we are going to uh look into the Spen of vectors what it means to have a Spen of vectors uh what is the linear combination and the relationship between the span and linear combination and the unit vectors then we are going to look into the application of scalar Vector multiplication in audio scaling uh example and then finally we are going to finish off this module by looking into the length of a vector and a DOT product and we are going to uh go back to this idea of distance understanding vector magnitude and understanding Vector length so let's get started it now before we look into this idea of span and linear combination I quickly wanted to look into this idea of scalar multiplication and the um specific definition of it so formally the scalar multiplication involves multiplying each component of a vector by scalar value effectively scaling the vector's magnitude so what do I mean here let's say we have a vector and I will write it in the general terms to keep everything General so let's say we have a vector a let me pick up my pen a and this Vector a is from n dimensional space so it is from RN and it can be represented by A1 A2 up to a n and I have this magnitude um of a vector and now I want to scale this uh Vector for which I know the magnitude and the dire diretion I want to scale it with a scaler and we learned before that the scaler is just a number so um scaler in this case I will be uh referring it to uh by C so c will be my scaler and uh this comes from R which means that it's a real number let me actually use a different color to make it easier to follow okay so my scaler will be with the color uh red so C and C comes from R so what do I mean by scalar multiplication I mean that I want to find what is this c times a this is what we mean by scalar multiplying with Vector now what does this definition say it says when we are multiplying in scalar with Vector so the scalar multiplication meaning multiplying Vector with the scalar it involves multiplying each component of a vector by a scalar value so if we translate it to this specific example it means that this amount so this amount is equal to taking C and multiplying it with each element of this Vector so each component of a vector and what are the components of my Vector the A1 A2 a up to the point of a n so all these components so that means that the first element of this new Vector the scalar multiplication result will be C * A1 C * h two dot dot dot so all this middle elements and at the end again c times and then a n and then in both cases of course the number of elements doesn't change so the so the number of rows of my Vector doesn't change it's n so here also n and then number of columns is the same so it's just a column Vector so one column so what we see here is the that we go from A1 to C * A1 we go from A2 to C C * A2 up to the N transforms into C * a n so we see very easily that I keep all the elements from this Vector I take them in here and instead what I'm doing is that I'm multiplying every element from this vector by the scaler C so this is exactly what this definition says and let's actually go ahead and do a Hands-On example with some real numbers to have this um method and to have this uh definition very clear in our mind because we are going to make use of this fundamental operation scalar multiplication on and on in the upcoming lectures and just in general in your journey in any applied sciences so this is an example of scalar multiplication uh here here what we are doing is that we want to multiply this Vector C so in this case the vector is defined by a letter C and then on the top we can see the arrow indicating that this is the vector now and here we refer the scalar by a letter K we are saying we want to perform scalar multiplication which means that we want to multiply the uh Vector C by the scaler K so how we can do that so what we want is to multiply K by C and we just learned that for that what we need to do let me write this over so this equal to minus 2 multiplied by 4 - 3 this is my Vector so this is the K and this is the C this is equal 2 so I take my scalar and I multiply it with the each of the element of the C so - 2 * 4 and then -2 * -3 so - 2 * 4 is = to - 8 and then - 2 * - 3 so- - it goes away it becomes a plus and the 2 * 3 is 6 so my end result the K * C is equal to minus 8 6 this is my final result so let's quickly also do yet another example and this one is a unique one because it's relating to this idea of U multiplying something with a zero uh which is something that we also uh know from our high school that when we multiply number let's say seven by zero they're getting zero and here in this example the uh problem is describe the effect of a scalar multiplication by zero on any vector VOR which means what we are doing is that in this example is we want to know what is this result of any Vector let's say Vector uh C so we will use the same example C only this time instead of multiplying it with the scalar k equal to minus 2 our scalar will be zero which means that c is equal to 4 - 3 and then K is now equal to zero and we want to find out what is this K * C let me actually write down the K with a different color k is equal to zero so what we want to find out is K * and then C and this is that equal to zero so I'm taking the K 0 times then I'm taking each of the elements of C which is 4 and then minus 3 and I know that when multiplying the number with a zero it gives me zero which means that I end up with 0 here 0 * 4 is 0 0 * - 3 is also zero so I end up with a zero Vector now this gives me an idea already that I can make a general conclusion that independent of the type of Vector that I have independent what are these values in my C uh if I have any Vector C and I'm multiplying it with zero then this will always give me a vector of zero because all the members of this final Vector will be just zeros so if for instance the C comes from uh let's say r n so it has n different elements it comes from uh n dimensional space then my final result of0 * C so this zero Vector this one so zero that this one will come also from our end so you will be having a vector so 0 * c will then be equal to 0 0 blah blah blah blah zero so n time zeros so this is then the idea of multiplying so scaling a vector with zero and this is our example to all right so let's now move on on to our application of scalar vual multiplication and then after this we will go back to this idea of linear combinations and dispense so in this specific application we have a scalar Vector multiplication and we are looking into application of audio scaling so the scalar Vector multiplication audio processing this can change the volume for instance of an audio signal without altering its content so um you might have noticed that um when uh when you are listening to video you can simply increase the volume of that video or decrease it but you will notice that the content doesn't change you are just increasing the volume or decreasing it even on the TV when you are watching a show you are increasing ining The Voice or decreasing now what you're basically doing behind and this is super interesting is that behind the scenes what is happening is that there is simply um audio that um contains that show and audio of that show is being multiplied with a scaler and that scale is simply the volume scale if you scale it in such way that you want to decrease the volume so the audio will then have uh lower volume then you are simply multiplying it uh your vector containing the audio information in such way that those newer volume indications they will be they will be containing lower numbers hope this makes sense let's look into the example this make uh this will definitely clear this out so um let's assume we have an a vector a that represents the audio signal and we want to m multiply Vector a by scalar B to adjust the volume so B is some sort of number it can be so B comes from our so is a real number while a is simply a vector given that it doesn't mention it here I'm assuming that a comes from RN so it comes from r n dimensional space so imagine of a as this Vector A1 HQ blah blah blah blah up to a n and each of these values it basically describes uh an the audio signal so it represents um uh an amount so it contains an amount that represents the audio signal of your uh video or uh your uh show and then the b in this case for instance in this example you can see that the B is then uh equal to for instance 1.2 1 2 or B is equal to - 1 / 2 so you can see that b is = to 1 / 2 which basically is offensive saying that b is equal to 0.5 or B can be equal to min-1 / 2 which is - 0.5 now then it says then the B * a which basically means multiplying our um scalar beta by the vector containing the audio signal a so this B * a is perceived as the same audio signal but at the lower volume now why lower because you can see that b is equal to 0.5 or Min - 0.5 it means that once you take all these elements of your a and you multiply it with the number that is smaller than one in this case 0.5 then all these numbers will decrease which means that also your audio volume will decrease so let me actually uh show you an example so let's say our talk show is very short and you know the audio variation is very low you have a vector a that is quite small it comes from a three diim menure space so R Tre and it has numbers like three uh six and then five so 3x1 vector and then we have our audio adjustment scalar beta which is equal to 0.5 now when we take the beta we're multiply it by our audio signal then what we do times this clear so times what we are doing is that we are simply taking all the elements of our a so three 6 and 5 and what we are doing is that we are multiplying it by 0.5 0.5 and 0.5 or you can also say 1 / 2 so what this is equal is that 3 * 0.5 is 1.5 6 * 0.5 is 3 and then 5 * 0.5 is 2.5 and you can see that all these numbers 1.5 3 and 2.5 they are smaller and specifically two times less than all the original values in the um original audio so original audio is a which was 3 6 and 5 and the new audio the the scaled one is so audio scaled so B * a is equal to 1.5 3 and 2.5 so you can clearly see this transform where uh this element three is larger than 1.5 6 is larger than three and then the last element five is larger than 2.5 which means that this audio audio is much at a higher volume so the volume two times higher than this audio so this is basically the idea of uh applying scalar multiplication to our audio pre-processing I will leave the other example to you that will show that when your scaler is equal to minus 0.5 you again will end up with a lower volume only that time the volume will be much much lower than the original one so now that we know how we can perform scal multiplication in theory as well as we have looked into an example how we can do it in terms of the numbers and multiplying them and we have also seen uh applying still multiplication in practice uh so we have seen in this audio processing stage the uh multiplication process we are ready to look into the visualization of it this will help us to get a better understanding on uh what exactly happens when we are scaling different vectors let's look actually in the following example so let's assume we have a vector oh let me remove that so let's assum we have a vector and that Vector is let me get a color this one for instance a vector a and this Vector a consists of elements one and two so where does this Vector lie the vector is with um one so here in our coordinate system this is our xaxis this is our y AIS and here we got uh let me actually pick another color let's say black one and then we got one and then two right this is two this is one so it is this one so the line that we get here it is this one so this is our Vector a now let's assume I want to multiply my Vector a so I want to scale my Vector a by a constant Tree by scaler tree so I have a scaler let's say I call K and this k a different number let's say k is equal to three so what I wanted to do is to perform a scal multiplication so I want to obtain K multiplied by a and we learned that this is simply = 2 three times and then one two and then this is equal to 3 * 1 3 * 2 which is equal to 3 and then six so let's also visualize the scaled uh Vector so let me pick this yellow color this will be our scaled Vector so we have that scale multiplication and we are going to visualize that so we have three and six so this is three 1 2 three and this is six so we have this point so you should already see what is going on here so we got 3 a here so you can see that this part is our Vector a and this longer one is 3 a and even visually you can see that this longer Vector is simply the three times of the shorter Vector so we got this and then if you add on the top of this the same three times you will then end up with the original so sced version of that so basically this is a this is a this is a we combine three different so we scale a three times and we simply get a three times longer version with the same direction so you can see that when we are scaling even visually it makes sense so we are scaling our Vector a three times and we are just getting that Vector so we are transforming let me remove this so basically we are taking this vector and we are scaling it up to this point if I would do it only two times then it would be something like this or one and half times it would be something like this so only half of it so now this should make much more sense let us actually do yet another example to uh make sure that we are clear on these visualizations because we are going to make use of it when uh looking into this idea of linear combination in a Spen so let's say we have a vector B and this Vector B has elements Z and three so let's visualize and uh plot this Vector so it contains elements Z and 0er and three so0 and three so this is the X element and the Y element on the Y AIS we can see this is three which means that our Vector B is this Vector all right perfect so this is our B let's now multiply so scale our Vector B by scalar 2 so let's say we want to get 2 times B so what is this amount this is equal to 2 * 2 * and I'm simply taking each of those elements 0o and then three so this is then equal to 2 * 0 is 0 and then 2 * 3 is equal to 6 so this is my new SK fed Vector 2 * B Vector this one so let's visualize this the x-axis value is zero so we are still here and then the Y AIS value is sixth so what is sixth this thing all right so you already should see that this is very similar what we had before so this is 2 B all right so this all uh should make sense uh also we learned as part of the um High School when visualizing different plots so this is quite similar to this idea of having y isal to X and then scaling it getting like Y is equal to 2x so in this case only we know exactly where the vector starts and ends uh so we have a much more specific definition instead of having all this infinite number of points on the line but the idea stays the same so we are taking this vector and we are then scaling it two times so we get 2 B vector and I could do the same only instead what I could also do is I could do like uh 0.5 or 1 / 2 * B so I take the half of it which means I would get this vector or I could multiply it with minus one so minus - 1 * B so I was skill with minus one and then I will simply get the negative version of my original Vector so this thing this would be minus b or Min -1 * B so this is basically the idea of uh scal multiplication when visualizing it in our coordinate system cian cordinate system and now when we know all this we are ready to move on on this idea of linear combination so let's now talk about another super important topic which is the dot product and it's applications so we are going to talk about the dot product and we are going to uh make this relation between the dot product and the distance something that we have learned as part of the high school so the dot product we are going to understand it we are going to plotted the vectors we are going to perform this dot product in examples as well as we are going to to look into the properties of the dot product and the inner product concept we are going to see the relationship between dot product and inner product we're going to talk about the cou squares inequality and the geometric interpretation of it so those are really important Concepts um the CI SARS inequality um the intuition of it as well as the implication of it um specifically in machine learning and then we are going to talk about the vector triangle inequality and uh in what cases also the norm is equal to zero and finally we're going to define the angle between vectors so when it comes to the dot product uh the dot product is also known as the scalar product it's a fundamental operation in linear algebra it combines the two vectors to produce a scalar it's a way to measure how much one vector extends in the direction of the one so providing insights into the geometric and the algebraic properties of the vectors so when we are using this operation of the dot product you can see it as an operation that we apply to vectors and in this way once we look into the geometric uh side of it so we will visualize the vectors and we will see the geometric insights behind it it will all make much more sense because this will relate back to our geometric interpretation this idea of Pythagorean theorem because they are highly related this idea of distance and how by using the dot product we can relate all these different concepts so let's first formally um Define the idea of uh dot product so the uh dot product of a vector v with itself gives the square of the length of V so earlier when we were looking into the prerequisites of the course I did briefly mention that we need to know this ideal length of a vector or length of a line we said that we denoted this by this concept or by this notation of two straight lines and then the name of the vector and then another two straight lines and this is what we refer as the length of vector so the distance between two points or the starting point and the end point point where our Vector is described so if we have for instance this Vector then if we take this point and we take this point then we can use that in order to calculate the distance of this vector and the distance of this Vector is defined by this notation so that's exactly what we have here too so you can see that we are saying that the dot product is actually this V so we take the vector we multiply with it itself we are seeing this is the dotproduct of a vector and it is equal to the square of the distance or the length of the vector so the uh in the left hand side we have this notation of the dot product we just use this dot as usual with any multiplication or any product and we are saying this is equal to and we take the length of a vector v and we Square it and this gives us our DOT product very soon we will see when uh applying it on a uh more general terms what this IDE of dot product is when we apply it to vectors just in general so in a two dimensional space when we have each Vector represented by two numbers let's say vector v which is equal to X and Y so we have on the first element the uh x coordinate of our Vector in our c coordinate system and the second element so this one is the Y so from y AIS on our Cartesian coordinate system then the dot product and the length are highly related as usual so we have here V the vector and then again so dotproduct of vector v is equal to x + y s so this is the length of this vector and it is equal to then the square of this length so uh let's actually plot this to see it in our coordinate system such that we can relate this back to the Pythagorean theorem and we can see how it is possible that the dot product the V * V which is equal to the square of the distance is actually equal to x + Y2 so let's assume we have this vector v and this vector v is represented by this x and the Y so we are in the R2 so this is our xaxis this is our y AIS and in here our vector v can be represented and I'm just taking random some random point and I'm saying this is my X and this is my y then this is simply the vector v so this X and Y this can be random numbers I just want to keep it General and to make it very similar to the definition what we just saw so we are going to relate this back to the Pythagorean theorem and we are going to prove how Pythagorean theorem is related to this vector and that the dotproduct of this Vector so V * V is actually equal 2 to the square of the distance of this vector v and then on its own this is then equal 2 x + Y 2 all right so the first thing that we can do is to check and use a Pythagorean theorem in order to prove that the length of this vector and uh so the distance from this point to this point is actually equal to x + Y 2 and to be more specific square root of x + y s so when we look in here one thing that we can see is that this side which is the side that we can have here in order to form our triangle so I want to take the beginning uh where my Vector starts and I want to see what is that that we have in here so this side given that this is zero and this is X this means that this entire distance is just X and of course the other way around holdes as well when we look at the horizontal side this length so this is the y coordinate of this point which is y so we see here that it is equal to this part so we see that we are dealing with um triangle where so this is our vector v and we can see that this this side is X and then this side is y now we also know that this angle is 90 using the Pythagorean theorem which states that in this type of triangles when it is a right triangle and we have X and Y as the sides we can compute the opposite side so the distance or the length of this side which is let's call it so in this case we have already the vector so we can say that the length of this Vector this is how we were defining the length of the vector this is then the square of it according to the Pythagorean theorem is equal to x + y s because the pagoria theorem says if this is a 90 angle here we have a here we have B then this side which is defined by C so c is equal to a + b and here the C is basically our vector and we are seeing the length of this Vector so the length of this Vector is basically equal to C from here to make it easier to uh to compare the two so this means that using the Pythagorean theorem we can already find that the length of this Vector is equal to the square roof of the x + y knowing that the vector has those coordinates X and Y okay so now when we are clear on uh what the norm is let's actually look into what we have here we are seeing that the dotproduct v v is equal to d square of the length of it now we just show that the length of the V Vector is equal to the square root of x square + y sare this means that this amount if we remove this what we were wanted what we wanted to prove so this is equal to square root x + y s and the square of it so we just want to prove by making use of all the geometric interpretation and the phenomenon that we already know including the Pagan theorem so this is then equal to square root with the square here it cancels out so this two and we simply end up with x + y s so we already proved that the dot product that we defined like this and we are saying according to the definition of the dot product V Dot product of the V so the vector v is equal to the square of the distance or the length of the vector that this in this specific case if we are in the two dimensional space and our Vector is defined by this x and the Y then this dot product is simply equal to the x + y^ 2 that's something that we just proved all right so let's now apply to an actual example so here we are seeing that the length of a vector is deeply related to dot products that's something that we just saw also when plotting it in our cartan coordinate system so let's now look into this specific example so V is equal to 34 so this is the xaxis this is the Y AIS and here the proof is that the dotproduct VV is equal to 3^ 2 + 4 2 is equal to 9 + 16 is = to 25 which means that the length is equal to square root of this dotproduct and it's equal to five now let's actually prove this this just to ensure that we are at the same page so we can actually go ahead and plot that in here so we have that the vector v is equal to three and four so a few things just to get straight before plotting this so we know that the dot product can be defined like this and we said that this is equal to the square of the length of this vector and we also prove that this is also equal to the x + y s if we are in the two-dimensional cartisian coordinate system so here this is our X and this our y so our X is equal to 3 and our Y is equal to 4 let's actually solve this problem and find it also geometrically to prove what is the dotproduct and what is the length of this Vector so the vector v is 34 which means that it is 1 2 three so this is three and this is four so we are here and this is our vector v so this also means that one of the sides of our triangle with 90 angle so our X so this our X and then X is equal to Tri so X is equal to Tri and our Y is equal to 4 so it is this one this is our y so now we want to find what is this length so we want to find what is the length of this vector v so the length of vector v is then equal square root of so it is equal to x + y s according to Pythagorean theorem and then this is equal to just filling in the numbers 4 S is 16 and then this is 9 + 16 is simply equal to 25 so this equal to 5 so in this way we can see that a we are proving that the the length of this vector v is equal to 5 if the sides are three and four which means that the vector has this coordinates 34 and at the same time so in this way we already see a few things so we see that the length of the vector v is equal to 5 that's something that we already proved and we also saw that the dot product is equal to the square of the length which means that it's equal to 5^ S which means that it's equal to 25 so and that's exactly what we see here it says that the do product of V is equal to 25 and the length of that Vector is equal to 5 so the dot product of the two n vectors A and B is defined as ATB which is equal to A1 B1 plus A2 B2 up to a n BN so this is basically the generalization of the definition that we just saw before so we go from the um from the description of working with the vector v and the distance to the more General one when we are now dealing with n dimensional vectors so now we are no longer in a basic two dimensional space but we are in an IND dimensional space and we have these two different vectors A and B think of a as this Vector A1 A2 up to a n and then think of this Vector b as B is equal to B1 B2 up to BN and the dotproduct of this two we are writing as a and then this small letter T which means transpose and we will see something very soon and we will also be discussing the topic of transpose later in the next module two multiplied by B so this ATB or a transpose B is um bit more advanced way of writing down this idea of dot product and the dot product of these two n vectors A and B is defined as this formula so we are basically cross multiplying the two we are taking this element from a and we are multiplying it with this one then we are taking this element of a and multiplying with this element of B so we are basically taking all the corresponding elements from these two different vectors and we are multiplying them together and creating this uh combination and adding them up to create this single value to represent these two vectors with the single value which we call Dot product so this notation ATB um which is a common way of noting and denoting this dot product this is just one way of describing this dot product there are also people who will I write down this so you see that this uh triangle type of braces and then the first vector and then the second one and then this one so you will notice one thing that will be uh quite different in here versus in this definition because in here we were discussing the uh dotproduct of a vector so we were talking about exactly the same Vector so here we have V and V and we were just saying let's take the dot product of a vector with itself and this was related to this idea of length when we go from one vector to this idea of multiple vectors so now we are creating no longer the do product of single Vector but we are defining the dot product of two vectors A and B the definition changes as you will notice but that's important to differentiate the two and to understand that one is actually U not the other one and to um to be able to see the difference between the two and not to confuse them so uh in the upcoming presentations we will use this notation of ATB much more often than this uh this second notation but if you see this this uh you can just know that we are talking about the same thing which is that the dot product so when the N is equal to one then the then this inner product or the dot product simplifies to the multiplication of just two numbers because we no longer have vectors but we just got a single value for a and a single value of B so let's assume that the N is equal to 1 and then a is equal to 2 and then B is equal to 3 and then the dot product is simply the a TB uh which is equal to 2 * 3 which is just 6 so uh when it comes to this uh idea of transpose I will explain this in a bit and we are going to uh describe this in detail as part of the next unit so I won't go too much into it but it's always a great idea to to know um also for this module um at high level this idea of transpose this T is basically referring to this so transpose so um to understand this idea of dot product uh the dot product is an operation that takes these two vectors vectors A and vectors B and returns a single number a scaler and the single number is uh computed by calculating the sum of all these individual values so it takes all these elements from one vector then the other one so A1 and B1 A2 B2 a and BN takes the value from one vector with the corresponding one from the other Vector multiplies them to each other and then add them all up and then this single value is created which will refer as the dot product so geometrically it represents this product of the vectors magnitudes and this cosine of the angle between them so um the we already know from high school and also from Tri gometry and geometry this idea of angles and what is the cosine of an angle so I won't go too much into into the detail of it I will assume that you know what a cosine is so the dot product is used to determine the angle between the two vectors and also to check whether they are orthogonal of not because uh we have a property that relates to dot product directly to the orthogonality of the two vectors and knowing how to calculate the dotproduct of the two vectors will help us to check whether the two vectors are orthogonal or not and just in general understanding this concept of dot product is super important because we use dot product in machine learning we use do product in uh generally in AI you will see that product appearing also when you when we are talking about attention mechanisms or calculating this uh attention scores as part of multi-head attention in Transformers We also use this idea of dot product scale do product so it's really fundamental and essential to understand this concept of dot product for metrix multiplication but also in general to apply linear algebra in different science related domains so let's now look into a specific example to um understand this concept the dotproduct of these two uh vectors in this case we have three dimensional vectors A and B the dot product can be calculated as follows so you can see that we are taking the one this is the A1 and we are multiplying it with B1 so it is the this one so B1 B1 is equal to 4 A1 is equal to 1 so it is this one we multiply the two and then we go to the next sum so here I will write it down actually underneath to make it easier so this is A1 this is A2 this is A3 as you can see and this is B1 B2 and B3 so taking A1 so taking A1 B1 adding A2 B2 two and adding A3 B3 we are getting the dot product which is equal to 4 - 6 + 5 which is equal to 3 so if you do the calculation or you use a calculator you will find out that the dot product that can be described by this formula which is very similar to what we have seen in here only n is equal to 3 we are getting that the dot product of the vectors A and B in R3 is equal to 3 so let's now look into another example where we will do all the calculations manually step by step so we have these two different vectors we have Vector a and Vector B let me also hear the arrows and I want to calculate the um dot product a b so the ATB the dotproduct ATB is equal to and we know that if we are in the N three dimensional space so we are in the R3 we expect that we will need to just use the cross product three times and we need to add them up so we know that it's equal to A1 let me use the black color so A1 B1 + A2 B2 + A3 B B3 now what is A1 what is A2 and what is A3 and what is B1 B2 B3 so A1 is equal to -1 B1 is equal to 0 A2 is = to 2 B2 is equal to 1 and A3 is equal to 2 this is three and then B3 is equal to - 3 now what is this amount -1 * is 0 2 * 1 is 2 and then 2 * - 3 is - 6 and what is 0 + 2 - 6 is -4 so let's Now understand what is this application of without product and how it can be used so the dot product between these two vectors gives us an idea uh a way to measure their similarity so it combines the magnitude the length of the vectors and the cosine of the angle between between them in the simple terms it tells us how much one vector extends in the direction of the other one now we know how we can calculate it once we have the vectors we we understand the notation we also know this relationship between the um vector and the uh distance what we mean when we have um Norm when we have a distance we also know the the length of a vector I want to combine all this and uh combine this with this idea of cosine which is something that we learn in our high school as part of our CH genetry and geometry I want to relate this all to make a sense how geometrically we can interpret deety of dot product and it will all uh make much more sense so the dot product between the two vectors gives us a measure of their similarity this is something that we are also using a lot in the field of artificial intelligence when we want to compare compare two different uh for instance users so we have one user and we want to compare the uh this one user to the other user then we are using this cosine Ru we are using what we call cosign similarity as way to measure their similarity so how similar those two customers are how similar those two users are how similar those two companies are and we are doing that by using this simple cosine idea which also is related to this idea of norms this idea of distance so or the length of a vector and the relationship between two vectors so let's actually wrap this up together and um clearly uh indicate what is this relationship between the dot product the length of vector cosine rule and this cosine similarity so in a simpler terms this uh dotproduct um it tells us how much one vector it extends in the direction of the other one so uh when vectors point in the same direction then we know that the dot product is positive and largest it means that we are dealing with two vectors that are very similar but when the vectors are perpendicular then the dot product is zero and we say that those two vectors do not share any Direction they are not similar so when the vectors point in the opposite direction then the dot product is negative we are saying those two users are really um negatively correlated so one is the opposite of the other one so to say so let's actually plot this and see it um and bring them all together so uh let's say we have a vector s and we have a vector R and we want to see how similar the two are so we have here our Vector s and here we have our Vector R and those two vectors come together and they um create this angle and we are referring this angle by angle Theta this is just a way to refer to our angle those are all things that we learned as part of high school through a gometry so they should all seem very familiar so uh from the geometry we know that if we have this triangle and here we got this um angle which is Theta and here we got uh let's say side C and then here a and then the B we know that the c^ 2 is equal to a 2 + b 2 - 2 * a * B * cine of the opposite angle of the C which is Theta now let's actually go ahead and apply is to our case when we instead of having just a triangle we got a vectors so we got a set of three vectors that form this triangle and we already have seen in many examples previously one way of doing that and that's actually go ahead and transform this Vector uh this uh into vectors and we can do that if we plot in here this side then this so we basically recreate the same triangle only this time the side are just vectors so this is let's say um our Vector R this is our Vector s and then this is obviously the r minus s and the opposite side is Alpha so the vector R and Vector s they form the angle Alpha so when we apply to the cosine rule to this of course we instead of using Vector notation we need to use their distances because the cosine rule is based on the sides so the length of the sides so the length of the uh of this side this one we denote by our common notation of the norm which is simply this thing and then the same holds for this side which is simply the norm or vector s and then for the third side for this one we then have Norm of R so if we apply this cosine low to our specific example we can see that in our case our C square is simply our the length of our Vector r- s only squared which means that so let let me actually write it down for Simplicity that part so a is then in this case my Vector R and then the distance of it obviously so the length of the uh Vector R and then B is the length of vector s and then the C is simply equal to the length of r- s then here I will just change my angle and I will call it t done and let's now apply the cosine law to our actual example which means that we got r - s and then squ is equal to and then we got R squ and then plus s squ so the length of the vector S and S S minus 2 * R * X s time cosine of theta so one thing that we can recognize here very quickly is that here we are dealing with the S squ of a length of a vector Rus s and we have learned from the previous definition of a dotproduct of a vector with itself so the dotproduct of vector v is equal to the square of a distance so this means that here we already got the squar of a distance of the vector v so this is something that we have because we have R minus s and then squ this is exactly the same as the V vector v and a squ with its length so the length of vector v squ is the same as the length of the vector R minus S 2 because in this case the V is equal to so the vector v is equal to Vector r- s and uh from this we can see that this means that here we are dealing with the dotproduct of R minus s so let me actually write this down in here in our example so this is basically the right hand side of the formula that we saw before where it was saying that vector v do product of vector v so this is equal 2 and then vector v the distance of or the length of it and then squared so in this case the vector v is = to r - s this means knowing this we can actually make use all that formula and say that here we are dealing with the dotproduct of Rus s which means that we can write that this can be re Rewritten as R minus s and then times r- s so in the left hand side we will be stting working with the dot product with the vectors while in the right hand side we will still keep our lengths so here we have the length of the r Vector so R 2 + S 2 - 2 * R and then s and then times cosine of theta now let's actually open those parentheses so this gives us R and then R basically the same do product of vector R and then minus Sr so dotproduct of vector S and R and then minus s actually plus s and then s and then minus s * R so I'm basically opening the parenthesis of the uh above part this left hand side to simp ified and then in the right hand side I will just copy paste this so r n 2 + S and then s and then Min - 2 * R forgot here arrows and then s and then cosine of theta let me actually go ahead and remove all these parts to open up some space for us and there we go right so let's actually go ahead and simplify what we got here now what do we see here we see here that here we got one dotproduct and we know that the dotproduct of a vector r r is simply the distance of that vector and then squared minus here we got so we will just keep it like that we are taking the dotproduct of vector s with Vector R we are adding here here we again got a DOT product of a vector with itself which is equal to the the the length of that Vector s only the square of it using exactly the same lad that we just saw the dot product of a vector and then here minus and I will keep the dot product of these two vectors S and R together so this is then equal to and I we just take over this part exactly as it was so R and then squ plus s and then squ and then minus 2 * R and then s and then cosine of theta now uh we already see couple of things that we can cancel out which is great so we see here that we are dealing with um the length of a vector R and A squar something that we see here too so we can safely cancel those out another thing that we can see that we can cancel is this so again the length of the vector SN squ so this also go away and we end up with this much more simpler for formula so we got minus s and then R and then minus s n r and then this is equal to minus 2 and then R and then s then cine of theta now we already see that this we can combine we can say this equal to minus 2 times and then the order doesn't matter of course in the dotproduct so R and then s and then this is equal to minus 2 * and then the distance or the length of the vector R and then the length of a vector s and then times cosine Theta okay perfect now we can get rid of minus 2 to so let me clear some space up to see what we end up with so we are left with the for following formula so we see that R and then s so the dot product of these two vectors is equal to R so the length of the vector R multiplied with the length of vector s multiplied by cosine and then Theta so this is basically what we end up with and exactly what we wanted to prove we wanted to see that the dot product so this is the DOT product dot product of vectors R and S is equal to the length of the vector R multiplied with the length of a vector s multiplied by the cosine of this Vector that they are forming so cosine of theta now why is this important this means that we can also take this cosine bring it to the other side and we can use that to describe the cosine with this uh dot product as well as the length of these two um uh vectors so from here we can say that the cosine of theta is equal to the dotproduct of the vector R and S divided to the length of vector R multiplied with the length of vector s so using this we can then calculate the cosine similarity between two different vectors and this then helps us to mathematically compute what is this measure of similarity between two different entities whether do we want to compute similarity between two customers whether do we want to compute the similarity between two users similarity between two uh profiles of uh clients so so this can be applied really to do very large range of applications but the idea is that in this way we have proven that we can use this algebraic concept the linear algebra concept of the dot product in order to compute a similarity measure that will help you to compute the similarity between two different entities and this is a very common application in machine learning in artificial intelligence uh the coite similarities one of the most popular uh similarity measures that is used in data science in machine learning in artificial intelligence whether it's in the clustering algorithms like K means whether it's in different sorts of machine learning algorithms or just in general to compute the similarity between uh two uh reviews that customer leave similarities between two profiles of customer similarity of two different um uh users for instance two users that are watching movie and you are building a movie Commander system you can use COI similarity to compare the two users behavior in order to improve the quality of the movie recommender and the applications are so R so versatile that um my takeway uh would be to just uh keep this cosign similarity in mind the formula of it and how it is related to the dot product because uh this is something that will be very useful uh for for your uh journey in applied sciences let's now talk about the idea of in product and how it relates to the idea of dot product so by definition the inner product generalizes the dot product to more abstract Vector spaces which can include spaces with complex numbers so it retains these Key Properties like linearity you know linear Independence and notion of angle and the length that we saw before the norm and how we related back to cosign similarity for much more complex vectors the inner product involves uh basically conjugating one of the vectors and in real Vector spaces the inner product is simply the dot product so if we have vectors that are from uh real spaces so they are from R2 R3 then in this case the inner product is exactly the same as the dot product so let's now move move on towards uh one of our final uh topics as part of this unit and this is a very important topic um very often referred as couchi SS inequality so this inequality and the law states that for all vectors X and Y in an inner product space or dot product space the absolute value of their inner product is less than or equal to the product of their Norms mathematic Al we can express this as the following expression so where this part it simply represents this dot product of X and Y and here as we already saw before the X and with this specific notation it refers to the length or the norm of our Vector X and then this one the norm of a vector y so this definition should and this um and this way of referencing the norm and the length as well as the dot product should seem very familiar to you so what we're saying here is basically if we have a vector X and the Y and we have a DOT product of X and Y if we take the uh magnitude then this will be smaller than equal the length of the vector X and the length of vector y so the intuition behind this low is that it tells us that the absolute value of this dot product between two vectors cannot exceed the product of their lengths so basically if we have a vector a and Vector B and we are Computing the dot product between them so ATB then this amount will always be smaller than equal than the length of vector a multiplied by the length of vector B this is all what this law is about oh this inequality it tells us that the absolute value of the dot product between two vectors cannot exceed the product of their lengths so let's actually look into and understand why does this even make sense so this idea this inequality C squ inequality it is about the limits of similarity so what is this level the maximum level that we can have when it comes to the similarity of two entities for instance if we got two um users and we want to understand how similar those users are this inequality helps us to understand what is this maximum level that we can have when it comes to the similarity of these two people what is this maximum similarity measure that we can have based on the characteristics of these users so no matter how similar the two vectors are there is an upper bound to this measure based on what kind of vectors we are talking about and this uh maximum amount this maximum measure is defined by their lengths so it confirms that this uh cosine of an angle that we just saw because we saw that the cosine Theta is equal 2 is exactly what we got in here so we saw that cosine of theta is equal to the dotproduct of vector R and S divided to the length of them and that's exactly what this cou squares is basically saying it's saying that it confirms that this cosine of the angle between them between these two vectors part of this dot product calculation it can not exceed one which feeds to our understanding of the cosine because we know that cosine is a volume that should be between minus one and one to be more specific minus one and one included and knowing this this helps us to get a limit on this idea so how can we prove the cou sares INE equality this comes down to this formula that we have already proven so let us actually go ahead and prove this couch squares inequality quite straightforward so we have just learned and we have actually proven that cosine Theta is equal to R and then s if those are our two vectors and then here we got the length of the vector R and then the length of a vector s now we know that a cosine is a measure that will always be between Min -1 and 1 so this means that we can use in order to prove this so knowing that this volume will always be smaller than equal to one It means that we can just take this and we can bring it here we know that the lengths are both positive amounts so it means that I can just multiply both sides by this amount that means that I will be left with R and then s so the dot product between the two vectors that will be smaller than equal and then R the length of this Vector multiply by the length of the vector s now as you can see this is exactly the C squares inequality that it says because it says that the absolute value of the inner product is less than or equal to the product of their Norms so the cou SES inequality is a fundamental principle in mathematics but also just in general it's used in so many applied sciences and it's applied across various domains including linear algebra physics but also machine learning and in finance so this helps us to establish a limit on the correlation or this idea of similarity that can exist between two vectors in any inner product space so if we got two different companies and we want to understand how similar they are performing we by knowing their performances and their measures we can uh then have a limit on how similar the two companies can be or how similar the two users can be based on their previous history and this all is being done by using this idea of C squares inequality now why does this matter so understanding this inequality gives us deeper insights into the vector spaces especially when working with this high dimension data which is quite uh often the case when we are dealing with Transformers with large language models with uh deep neural networks or um we are working in finance so this is a super uh important concept when it comes to applied sciences so it ensures that this um validity of operations when it comes to mathematical side and the Transformations we perform on our data on the Practical side that those two are coherent and we ensure that we are safe in making different assumptions and we provide in this way the safety net for um our design of the algorithm we ensure that our algorithm is performing well so every time when we are uh creating a program or an algorithm for a specific case then using this inequality we can basically add a use cases we can create a test cases and we can add these constraints to our algorithm and we can design our algorithm in more intelligent way and we can ensure that we won't have cases when the uh limit goes above uh this threshold that we already got based on this inequality and this is a very important application in a practical sense when it comes to applying layer algebra to applied sciences now uh the final question that I will leave you with is the case when the norm is equal to zero so we briefly tached upon this point and we spoke about this idea of perpendicularity and in a one specific case when the norm of a vector v equals zero so the theorem says that the norm of a vector b equals z if and only if B is the zero Vector so mathematically this means that the distance of the vector v is equal to zero so basically we are dealing with a zero Vector so V is equal to Zer this means that the only Vector with no magnitude pointing in no direction is a zero Vector only in that case we will get a norm equal to Z this concept is super important to understand this uniqueness of a vector and this different foundational principles and properties that will also see appearing in the upcoming lectures and in the upcoming lessons this is all for this module and for this unit uh we have learned ton of uh important stuff when it comes to the vectors so we have looked into the uh from very scratch the idea of vectors the Norms the distances the inner product the dot product we have looked into the geometric interpretation of it we have visualized it we have looked into different properties of vectors the spaces we have also looked into the properties of the dot product we have proven them we have looked into ton of examples we have understood how we can plot vectors how we can understand and relate the IDE of vectors to this dot product and the dot product to the cosine of two vectors and the cosine of an angle and the relationship between two vectors and the similarity between these vectors how we can use and apply that in machine learning in artificial intelligence we have kind of made those relationships there and um we have also looked into fundamental concepts including the um uh scalar Vector multiplications operations with vectors adding them subtracting them and um we have also looked into this idea of linear combination dispan of vectors as well as linear Independence we have defined linear Independence and we have also spoken about uh and provided examples for vectors that can be uh marked and defined as linearly independent and also examples when our vectors were linearly dependent thanks for uh staying with me uh so far and I will see you in the next unit welcome to the module one of this new unit when we are going to talk about about matrices as well as linear systems so those are all fundamental concepts that you will see time and time again when applying linear algebra not only in mathematics but also in applies Sciences like data science artificial intelligence when training different machine learning models and trying to see what is this mathematics behind machine learning models different optimization techniques when you want to solve different problems using linear algebra so in this first module as part of foundations of linear systems and matrices we're going to introduce this concept of linear systems and then we are going to talk about the general linear systems we are going to uh see this common labeling all the coefficients this idea of indices that refer to the rows and the columns we're are going to see what is this differentiation between homogeneous and nonhomogeneous systems so without further Ado let's get started so U the linear systems form the uh bedro of linear algebra modeling this areay of problems thanks to this advancements in these linear systems and solving it in Computing we can now solve a large amount of problems in a very efficient and a fast way so uh the general linear systems can be represented by this uh set of M equations with n unknowns in the previous unit when we were looking into this uh linear combination of vectors we saw this notation which was A1 and then we had C1 multiplied or rather let me keep me uh let me keep the same notation so we had this linear combination of vectors so we had beta 1 and then we had A1 Plus beta 2 and then A2 and those are all vectors plus A3 so bet 3 * A3 dot dot dot and then beta M time a M this is the notation that we saw before and we said we want to come up we wanted to come up with the linear combination of these different vectors A1 A2 A3 up to a and then we use that in order to get a sense of whether we are dealing with linearly independent variables vectors or linearly dependent vectors and then we also commented on this pen that this vectors take now when it comes to um the uh vectors and just in general linear systems we can represent what we had before now in terms of with uh bigger system so in terms of M equations and with n unknowns so here what you can see here is that we have M different equations so we have beta B1 B2 up to BM so you can see it in here and then each of this equation it contains n unknowns so you can see that the unknowns it stays the same so the unknowns are those X1 X2 up to xn so X1 X2 up to xn are the set of all n unknowns and then M equations that you can see in here are all these equations so a11 X1 plus a12 X2 dot dot dot and then a1n and then xn is equal to B1 and here one thing that is really important to keep in mind is that the indexing is what we need to focus on so we need to keep this one in mind this a i j and this XI so this is something that we also spoke about when uh discussing the lar combination of vectors we slightly uh touched upon on this topic so let's now dive into this this indexing and how do we indexes a i j what are these A's what are these JS and here you can see that we have a11 and then a12 and then up to the a1n and this is in our equation one and then we have in our equation two A1 two I may actually write this with a different color so in our equation two we got a 21 a23 up to a2n and this a that you see here those are just real numbers so a11 can be 1 A1 2 can be three A1 n can be 100 and then the same also holds for this B1 for this B2 and for this BN and all these values A's and B's they are just real numbers the only unknowns that we got here are those so the X1 X2 up to xn all right so what about the indexing now so we got a i j and as you can see in this case the first thing that we can see here it stays everywhere the same which is the one so we got here one we got here one and up to the point we got here one whereas the second Index this one it does change it grows gradually with one and it becomes it goes from one to two and up to n so you can see here that the first index first index or index I it goes from one it doesn't change it's just one so it is one one and one so here in all cases for this equation I is equal to 1 but another thing that you can notice here is is that the index 2 unlike index I so the second index which is the J so you see here that the second index is referred as J this is a general way of defining the indexes so here J is equal to one 2 dot dot dot and then n so basically the I doesn't change in the same row but the G changes and then of course we have slightly different in terms of I but then the same for J for our second equation so here I is equal to 2 and then J is again equal to 1 and then two dot dot dot and then n and then here up to for the last equation our I is equal to M and then our J is again equal to one till 2 dot dot dot so you might notice that I was looking at this from the row perspective so I was saying pair equation or pair Row the I doesn't change but then the J stays the same and then it is I one two up to n but the set is the same so it is it contains all these different elements here so one one two and then n but it contains all these different real numbers going from one till n because we are combining and we are creating this combination the sum of all these values a11 and then X1 a12 X2 A1 n xn and another thing that you can also notice here is that here with the second index so with this J J is equal to one then here the X's corresponding index is also one when the J is equal to 2 then the ex's corresponding index is also two and then here the same story and you will notice that while the coefficient contains two indices 1 one one two or 1 n which are the two indices for the coefficients for the unknowns we got just single index which goes from one till n so basically for A's for the coefficients so I let me write with the right color so I can be one 2 all the way to M whereas in case of J it can be one two all the way to n and the indices are basically used to help us to keep track of in which row we are and what is the um variable that the coefficient belongs to because knowing this second Index this helps us to understand that we are dealing with a coefficient that corresponds to this first unknown the first variable X1 and then the same holds in here as you can see in here and in here we are dealing with the same variable X1 therefore the second index the index J is then the same both in the first equation and in the second one in both cases it's equal to one okay so now when we are clear on that let's also understand this high level concept because you will see this system of linear systems this m equations and N unknowns appearing a lot not only in terms of calculating and finding the solution to this linear system but this actually has a very common application when it comes to um running regression linear regression specifically and one thing that you can notice here is that here we got also this B1 B2 up to BM and you will notice that here the index also uh goes from one but then this time to M so when it comes to the rows we have M rows or M equations therefore we also expect when it comes to Counting from the top that at the bottom we will see an M whereas if we count from this side so kind of like imagine it like a column then we see that it goes from one till n so those are common obervations and reference to um number of observations and number of uh features that you will see in your data when dealing with data analysis or modeling data so just this uh just keep those things in mind this uh abbrevation of M and then n m equation and unknowns because this will become very handy and the same also holds for this indexing just to keep in mind that this I and this J what those indices are and how for instance the first you know the I the first index changes when we go from up to the bottom and how the second index J goes and it changes when we go from left to the right when we go through the columns but we are going to see this also in the upcoming slides so uh we can we will have time to practice it so um this is what we are calling a coefficient labeling the coefficient uh a i j so this thing in a linear system they are labeled where the first index represents the row and the second index denotes the column so when we see a i j we know that this refers to the row and the J refers to the column so this is something that we use in order to understand where exactly in our Matrix something that we can we will see very soon where exactly our unit or our uh member that is part of our Matrix where exactly is that located in which row and in which column the systematic labeling is super important because this helps us to keep the structure and this helps us to understand uh what does this uh coefficients are present what what is this row that it belongs and what is the column it belongs so for which equation and for which unknown we have already solved the problem such that we can know what this uh coefficient represents so before moving on onto the actual linear systems and this definition of metrices let's quickly understand this distinction between homogeneous and non-homogeneous because this will help us to also get an understanding how we can solve a system of linear systems so a system is homogeneous if all the constant terms b i are zero otherwise it's non homogeneous so identifying this helps us to really understand nature of the solution set that we need to get and to understand what kind of strategy we need to to use in order to solve this problem now what do I mean by bi we just saw that we had this system of M equations with n unknowns and we saw that that we have in the right hand side this B1 B2 up to BM which means that we had this m different equations with n different unknowns and to find a solution to the system it means finding this values corresponding to X1 X1 here X2 X2 xn so basically finding the set of X1 X2 up to xn that solves this problem and for us to know how to solve this problem we need to know whether this B1 is equal to zero or not this B2 is equal to zero or not and then this BM is equal to zero or not this is very similar to this idea of solving any sorts of um problems that contain unknowns for instance if we have three x is equal to let's say five solving this is entirely different than if we know that the Tre X is equal to zero so this is a super simplified version of course but the idea is the same knowing that this B1 B2 up to BM this R zero this gives us an idea how we can solve this problem and later on we will see this distinction between non-homogeneous and homogeneous system and whenever this BS so whenever this B1 B2 up to BM whenever these BS are zero then we are saying that the system is homogeneous and we need to solve a homogeneous system otherwise we are dealing with non homog system so this means that the bis are not all zero let's now move on to the second module which is about the matrices so we are going to define the Matrix we are going to see the definition of it as well as the notation the IDE of rows columns Dimensions uh some of which we have already touched upon but we are going to uh go into the depth of it we're going to learn properly as well as we are going to see many examples then we are going to talk about Matrix types so here we will talk about identity Matrix diagonal matrices and also special type of matrices like matrices containing only zeros and only ones so by definition and a matrix is a rectangular array of real numbers that are arranged in rows and in columns for example an M by n Matrix a can be represented as follows so so let's look into this definition and this reference to Matrix we call this Matrix or Matrix a and every Matrix it can be described by this rows and columns where we always have this uh way of describing this Matrix always should be defined by the number of rows and number of columns so this is super important and let's look into this specific Matrix so we have a matrix a and all these values they are members of this Matrix they form the Matrix and we already saw this labeling of a i j where we said that I is referred to the row so you might recall that those all these equations that we got so this horizontal lines where I was equal to one I it was equal to two I was equal to three up to the point of I was equal to M and then we had this J so this thing and then J was referred to the columns and we had J was here here one and then two and then three up to the point of n so 1 2 3 and N this is exactly what you can see here so in this Matrix we got all these elements a11 is a number a12 is a number up to the a1n is a number those are all real numbers and one thing that you can notice here is that here we got a11 so this is our first row and First Column here we got A1 two this is our first row and second column and then we got up to the point of a1n actually let me just write this down even at a bigger scale such that I can make more nose so let's assume we have this Matrix a and this Matrix a if I'm bigger and we got all these different elements so we start with our first row and here we have a 1 one so here the row that I will write with let's say we blue the row is equal to one and then the column is one so this is Row one this is Row one row one and this is column one let me write it wait right this is column one this is column two this is column three dot dot dot and this is column n and this this is row two this is Row three dot dot dot and this is row M so in total I got M rows and N columns I will come to this notation that I'm putting here later for now let's keep track of the rows and the columns to get a good understanding what this indices were about that we just learned so every time I will also mention this reference to a i j to keep track of this and also let me write it with the right colors so a i this is the row and J which is the column so all the elements I'm just defining by this a because it's just a way to reference a part that comes from a matrix it's a just common way to write the entire matrix by capital letter A whereas its members we will write with the um with the lower case a so this is Matrix Matrix a all right so here in the second row But First Column we got a two and then one because it is still in the first column and then when it comes to this element we have here a the row is the first one because we are in the first row but then we are in the second column so this one should be two then we go on to the next element in our first row so a one and then three and then dot dot dot the last element is an a as we are still in the first row it will be one the I but then given we are in the last column the column index of the J will be equal to n because we got in total in columns so we are now ready to go into the second row so here given that we already have our first element a21 this is in our second row and the First Column so the I is equal to here two and G is equal to 1 let's now write down the element in the second draw a second column as you might have already guessed I is equal to here one I equal to here two sorry and then uh the J is equal to 2 and then we go on to the next element which is in the second row and the third column so it's a the row index is two so I is equal to 2 and then the column index is three dot dot dot and then we got a as we are in the second row it is the I is equal to 2 and as we are in the last column the J is equal to n now you might have already guessed when I was writing this down that whenever you are in row and you move on to all the elements in the same Row the I so the row index it stays the same only you need to uh update the column index so here for instance you got one one one here also one so all the way down in the same row or one which logically makes sense because we are in the same row so the row index should not change but instead you should change the column index like here column one column two column Tre all the way to column n so those are our columns dot dotp so let me make this distinction and those are our row as you can see so this kind of mentally helps us to understand why we are writing all the indices over time once you practice more with this this will become more natural very quickly remove this so now I will write the rest very quickly so as you might have already guessed we are in the third row so we have a tree so everywhere I would just write down the ace so first I'll write down the ace and then the rows the row index will stay the same as I'm in the same row but then I will increase the columns gradually so we are in the column one and the column two column three up to the column n so now the remaining stuff you can actually write down yourself to just practice let's now move on onto the last row and last column so in the last row we got a a a up to here here and in the last row the uh row index is M which means that here I need to have M M M everywhere I need to have M and then the column index is 1 2 three all the way to n so this last column is very interesting too you can see here that we have the opposite of what we have here because in the last column we see that the uh column index is the same so it is everywhere n Only the first index the index of the row it changes it goes from 1 2 3 up to M which is of course logical because we said that in the last column if we are looking it from the perspective of column so all this values this A's so the all the ends they are logical because they we are in the last column we are in the same column but then the row changes here we are in the row one here we are in the row two Row three after to row M therefore we have also at the end a MN now let's talk about this idea of MN we said that our Matrix a has M as a number of rows and n as a number of columns which you can see by the way also here so we always refer the dimension of a matrix so the dimension dimension of Matrix a by these two numbers so first we always write down the number of row in this case M then as the second element we are writing the number of columns in this case n we are always putting this small X in between to kind of emphasize M by n Matrix and we most of the time use the square braces to Showcase that we are dealing with Dimension and in this case we are saying the dimension of Matrix a is equal to M byn so we are dealing with M byn Matrix this is a common convention used in linear algebra in mathematics General but also used in data science uh in machine learning artificial intelligence so whenever you are dealing with matrices a it is a common convention to talk about this idea of dimensions and the idea of Dimensions is super important when it comes to the idea of multiplication multiplying Vector with Matrix Matrix with Matrix so this dot product Dimensions play a central role in here so keep this one in mind once we uh get to the point of that products this one will become very handy so let's now look into a specific example where we see simple Matrix a so in this case you can see that we are dealing with a matrix that has a 2x3 Dimensions so like we just learned 2x3 means that we got two rows and three columns that's something that you can also see here very quickly so you have a small Matrix on the small matrix it's really easy to actually count so you can see that we got Row one and row two and we got column one column two and column three so this basically confirms these Dimensions therefore we are also saying that we have a 2 by three Matrix and like usual we first write down the number of rows and then the number of columns you can see here that here we have this elements for our Matrix so a is equal to 1 2 3 for the first row and then our 4 5 6 for the second row so from this actually I think it's a good exercise to just uh verify our understanding of IND and from this um we can write down that for instance all these different elements uh like a 1 one is equal to 1 A1 2 which means that we are in the first row and in the second column so we have this element is equal to two and then we got a and then one three so we are in the third column so this one is equal 2 3 and then a 21 is equal to 4 a 22 is equal to 5 and then a 23 is equal to 6 so this is actually a good way to practice our understanding of indices our understanding of this Matrix structure and the understanding of dimension of the Matrix which in this case is 2x3 so this is yet another different definition of a matrix structure when it comes to the rows columns and dimensions so this is exactly what we just spoke about on our example and let's just quickly look at the formal definition so the rows of a matrix are the horizontal lines of the of the entries while the comms are the vertical lines so basically it's saying those are let me remove this so the rows are the horizontal line and the columns are those vertical lines those are the columns this helps us to form these columns so col one colum two and colum three whereas this horizontal lines it helps us to create the rows so Row one and row two which is a core Matrix operations so when it comes to matrices we often perform Matrix additions Matrix substraction but also Matrix um a scalar multiplication of this Matrix so multiplying Matrix MX with a scalar and then Matrix um multiplication just in general so taking two matrices and multiplying them we are going to look into this concept in detail we are going to see many examples like before we are going to dive deeper into this such that we lay the ground on uh to the next module which is solving a system of M equations with an unknown so solving this General U linear system so for the beginning uh we will be looking into this Matrix operations where we are adding or subtracting matrices so by definition the sum of two matrices A and B of the same dimensions is obtained by adding their corresponding elements so by taking the element i j from both matrices and adding them to each other so in this case you can see that Matrix A and B are here and uh the uh definition says we just simply need to take the corresponding elements corresponding elements from the row I and the column J take them add them and this will become an element in our final um Matrix because when we are adding two matrices of the same size the result is yet another Matrix so we will use the Matrix a to add to Matrix B and this will give us a matrix a plus b and this i j simply refers to the indices corresponding to the row and the column we will look into an example in a bit and this will make much more sense and the same holds also for the difference so by definition the difference of the two matrices A and B of the same dimensions is obtained by subtracting their corresponding Elements which means that in order to obtain this Matrix a minus B this is a new Matrix we simply need to look for each element so we are going to index them for a row I and J we are going to do this pairwise element wise subtractions we are going to see what is that element corresponding to the row I and column G in The Matrix a which we say is a i j we are going to subtract from this the element in the row I and column G that comes from Matrix B and this will give us our new Matrix which is a minus B so let's now look into an example in this Matrix Matrix um uh a and Matrix B are used and Matrix a is of the size 3x3 Matrix 3 Matrix B is of the size 3 by 3 in order to obtain a plus b what we are doing is that we are performing element wise additions now let's verify this so what we are doing here is that we are saying a plus b let me actually get a larger area here so let's say we have the two matrixes I want to add the two in such way that we do everything one by one such that the idea of a plus b and addition of the matrices will make sense so we want to find out a plus b for that what we are going to do is that we are going to make use of this definition that A + B and then I J is equal to a i j+ b i j which is a fancy way or mathematical way or describing that for each element we need to go a look for the row I and column J and take that element from the um column from that uh Matrix a and from The Matrix B so this means that for a + b this is going to be a matrix that will have the same number of rows and the same number of columns as two matrices because both A and B are 3x3 which means also their sum is going to be 3x3 so this going to be 3x3 and here we are going to do so we are going to take for the first row and the First Column so for a + b 1 one so first row and First Column we need to go to the first row and First Column of Matrix a and the first row and First Column of Matrix B and we need to add this two elements so we need to do 1 + 1 and then we need to go on to the second column so the first row and the second column which means that we need to be here in both matrices so here we have 0 + 2 and then we got 2 + 3 and then we got 0 + 0 so you can see it in here and then we have 1 + 0 and then we have 3 + 1 0 + 1 and then 0 + 2 and then 1 + 3 which gives us so so 1 + 1 is = 2 0 + 2 is = 2 and then 2 + 3 is = 5 0 + 0 is = to 0 0 + 1 is = 1 1 + 0 is = to 1 0 + 2 is = 2 and then 3 + 1 is equal to 4 1 + 3 is equal to 4 which means that our A + B is equal to this Matrix that we got in here so you can see that we are getting exactly what we uh what we have here only we have done it manually one by one so the same idea holds exactly when we have a minus B only instead of adding you will have to do here minuses so minus minus so everywhere minus so 1 - 1 0 - 2 2 - 3 Etc so let's look into another addition so in this case by definition it is defined as this element wise uh of the adding of these two matrices here the only difference in this definition is that it's saying it's calling this a plus b as C so this new Matrix that we are getting as a result of adding a to B it's calling C so basically it's the same as calling this Matrix as C you will see also this type of definitions so in this case The Matrix C is equal to a plus b which basically means that for each row row with index I and with each column with index J go and look for row I and index J take the corresponding elements from Matrix a and Matrix B add them in order to get that corresponding element in our new Matrix C and you can see that in this example that's exactly what we are doing we have a we have B we are taking this element and this one so 1 + 1 we are getting here two and then 0 + 2 we are getting two here 2 + 3 is 5 and then 0 + 0 is = to 0 1 + 0 is = to 1 and then 3 + 1 is = to 4 so now we already go to the next topic which is about scalar multiplication of a matrix so by definition scalar multiplication of a matrix a by scalar Alpha results in new Matrix where each entry of a is multiply by Alpha the idea of scalar multiplication matrices is actually quite similar to this idea of scaled multiplication in vectors so uh we have already seen in the lecture of the vector multiplication that when we were having this scaler C and we had this Vector a then uh when we are multiplying C which is a real number with Vector a then we simply need to take all the elements of vector a so A1 A2 or all the way down to a n and we need to multiply them by this same scaler so C this is what we were doing with vectors and that's exactly the idea behind matrices and when uh during the scalar multiplication of matrices only instead of multiplying only just one vector with this scaler C now we need to apply this to all the rows and all the columns so here we got this one column and Matrix is simply a combination of multiple vectors which means that we need to multiply all these elements of all the vectors of all the columns in this Matrix so let's actually look into a specific example so in this case we have a matrix a and this Matrix a is this thing and we have a scaler which is three so in here our Alpha is equal to three or you can call it C or anything so you can see that when we are scaling The Matrix with a scaler in this case Tre with this Matrix what we are doing is that we are simply taking each of these elements and multiplying it with the scaler so 1 by 3 is 3 2x 3 is 6 3x 3 is 9 and 4x 3 is 12 this is the idea behind this entire scalar multiplication of a matrix in more general terms if we for instance have a matrix a so let's actually look into a high level General example when we have the a matrix M by n so we got M rows and N columns and we want to get a scal multiplication of this Matrix and um scaler that we have here as in our definition it is defined by this alpha alpha is just a number you can go C you can quote B anything so in this case our scalar alpha alpha is coming from R so it's a real number so Alpha time a is then simply equal to to this new Matrix where all of these elements are simply multiplied by this scale so I would just take over all these values H1 up to a M1 and then A1 2 a22 all the way down to a M2 and then let me also add the last column just for fun here a 2 N and then here a MN so here this new scaled mul multiplies so scaled uh Matrix a so Alpha * a is simply equal to Alpha time all these elements are simply multiplied by this scale it is as simple as that so that's the simple idea behind uh metrix uh scaling so when you are doing scalar multiplication of this Matrix you simply take all the values and you multiply them element by element per row and per column by that single scaler Alpha do note that you are multiplying them all without exclusion with exactly the same number which is that Alpha so let's now look into the definition of matrix multiplication so here we are no longer multiplying a matrix with a scaler but we are multiplying Matrix with a matrix so the product of an M by n Matrix a and an N by P Matrix B results in an M by P Matrix C where each entry cig is computed as the dotproduct of the each Road of a and the J column of B now what does this mean firstly let's look and unpack this part of the definition so we got Matrix a that is M by by n and then we got Matrix B which is n by P what this means is that in this case Matrix a has M rows and N columns and Matrix B has n rows and P cups so this is then simply the dimension dimensions of the two matrices so then it's saying that by definition the product of these two matrices so the product of A and B the product of the two me is equal to to Matrix C and each entry cig J so C J is computed as the dotproduct of the E row of a and the J column of B now this part might seem bit difficult but once we look into the actual example and we illustrate this on our common high level General expressions of Matrix A and B and multiplic ation this will make much more sense for now before coming to this one I just wanted to refresh our memory on one thing I said before when discussing also this idea of improving uh this uh different properties of vectors that when we want to multiply a vector with a matrix or Matrix with Matrix or vector with a vector we need to ensure that from the first element the number of columns is equal to the number number of rows of the second element this is also very important for this specific case and just in general for matrix multiplication so you can notice here that the number of comms here is equal to the number of rows in here and the order is very important so in case of matrix multiplication the order is really important which means that if you have a matrix a and you want to multiply it with a matrix B then the number of columns of a should be equal to the number of rows of B otherwise you cannot multiply those two matrices with each other so in case you got a matrix a that doesn't have the same number of columns as the rows of number of the Matrix B then there are some alternative things that you can do including this idea of the transpose that we saw also doing when Computing the dot product between this Vector a and Vector B that's something that we also do in programming when we are dealing with this Matrix and we want to compute this relationship between two matrices but the number of columns of one of the first one is not equal to the number of rows of the second one we are simply uh manipulating these matrices or moving some data if that's not hurting our problem maybe uh flipping so transposing our Matrix or applying any other source of operation to it to ensure that the two matrices that we are multiplying with each other the first one's number of columns is equal to the second one's number of rows so that's just the low and that's something that you should follow if you want to multiply these two matrices all right so now let's move on onto the idea of multiplying and Dot product let's look into a specific example and this will um help us to understand this process better so before doing that I just want to quickly show you this general idea so if we have a matrix a that is M by n which means that it looks something like this like A1 1 a 2 1 up to the point of a m one and then here we got let's say a one 2 a 22 up to the point of a M2 and then at the end we got a MN and here we got a one n so let me also add this one 2 N and we got a matrix B this Matrix B is n by P so it has n rows and P columns so we are fine in terms of Dimension here and we got here b11 B21 up to the point of b m sorry BN in this case let's not confuse the letters so b n 1 B one 2 B 22 up to the point of B n two because n now is the number of rows for Matrix B unlike for the Matrix a up to b 1 p and here b 2 p and here up to the point of B and then n p this is the last element in order to perform um multiplication between these two matrices so to obtain a matrix C which is equal to a * B what we need to do is we simply need to take pair case so pair Row for the row I for instance we need to take this element so this row and we need to multiply it with this so we need to find a DOT product between this row and this column then we need to move on onto the next one and then for the second element we will then take this row and we will multiply it with this one so this is then something that we need to do in order to obtain these elements and you might have already noticed that we got this m by n and n by P so you might have already guessed what will be the dimension of the C if we got that the dimension of a is equal to M by n and the D dimension of B is equal 2 N by P then the results Matrix after M multiplying the two of Matrix c will be will be having a number of rows equal to this and the number of coms equal to this so This middle part basically disappears and the number of rows of the first Matrix will be then the number of rows of this result Matrix C and the number of columns or the second Matrix so Matrix B will then be our final number of columns so we will then have a matrix C that will have a dimension so Dimension so dimension of C will then be equal to M by P so we will have M rows and P columns so how we are going to compute this so for c i j which means row I and column J let's look into the definition of it it's saying CI J is computed as a dotproduct of the E row and the J column so each roow from a and Jade column of B what is the each Road of a the each Road of a is somewhere here so each Road of a it is uh d a and then I one then a and then I2 and then a and then I3 dot dot dot and then a i and then we got in total n color columns and and we always do the transpose right when Computing this um dot product so we then take the transpose so we take this row row I and we multiply it so we do the dot product between this one this is the a i and the B J this is column J it is somewhere here so it is B and then we got the first element which is one and then J and then b 2 J B 3j dot dot dot up to B and then in total we got n rows in B so n and then the J is the column so it's Tak is the same so this is then the dot product between e row that comes from Matrix a and the J column that comes from Matrix B so it's always like that actually so we always take row by row so we take this different so every time we take just a row and we multiply with the corresponding column and then we get the dot product between this row that comes from the first Matrix and then the column that comes from the second Matrix in that specific order in order to get our DOT product and that specific volume and what is this amount actually so when we calculate this dot product you can quickly see that we have a i1 multiplied by B1 J plus a I2 multiplied by b 2 J and then dot dot dot a i n multiplied by b n g and this new Matrix c will then have all these elements so C11 c21 and then c31 dot dot dot and then see the last row as the number of rows of C is m c m see here M so C and then here it will be 1 2 C 22 C3 and then two up to the point of cm and then two and then here the last col will be c one and then p is the number of coms in C so C1 p and then C2 p and then C3 P that do dot dot and then c m and then P okay so this is what we get this is our final Matrix C when multiplying Matrix a and Matrix B so let me clean this up C is to now if you want to find out what is C11 you can easily feel in this general formula that uh that we just calculated the I is equal to 1 and then J is equal to 1 and this will give you C11 by using this formula if you want to get the CM P then just fill in the I is equal to M and then G is equal to P in order to get this value CN P so you can already see the amount of calculations you need to do in order to get all these elements from these large matrices A and B let's actually look into a simple example to clarify this so we have a matrix a here and Matrix B here and we want to do a multiplication of the two and we have just learned how to do it let's actually do it one by one so we got a matrix a which is equal to 1 2 3 4 with Dimensions 2 by 2 then we got a matrix B which has values 2 Z and then then 1 2 so it is 2x two and I want to find what is c that is equal to a * B and I know already by looking at these Dimensions that c is going to be equal to 2 by 2 so you might recall that I said that when looking at this final result the number of rows or the final um Matrix will be this so the number of rows of the initial Matrix a and then the number of columns of this final Vector c will be the number of vectors number of columns of this second Matrix B so two therefore I know already before even doing calculations that the uh product Matrix c equal to a * B is going to have a dimension 2x two let's actually do a calculation to check this so C is then equal to a * B and it's equal to 1 2 3 4 multiply by 21 2 okay so I expect to have four different elements here here here and here so to obtain the C11 so it is C11 in here what I need to do is that I need to look at the first row and the first column in here here so first row from a and the First Column of B and I'm doing the dotproduct which means 1 * 2 + 2 * 1 1 * 2 is 2 2 * 1 is 1 so here I'm getting 1 * 2 + 2 * 1 which basically gives me 2 + 2 and that's equal to 4 so here I'm just writing down 1 * 2 + 2 * 1 now when I want to get this value which is C1 two this means that I want to get the first row and the second column and that's exactly what I'm doing so I'm going back and I'm saying let's look at the first row but this time we will look at the second col from the from the Matrix B so 1 * 0 * 0 plus 2 * 2 and then I do the same only this time for the second row which means I'm picking this row and then this column so it is 3 * 2 + 4 * 1 and for the final element c22 I'm taking the second row and the second column which gives me 3 * 0+ 4 * 2 now what does this giv me this gives me this 4x4 Matrix where 1 * 2 + 2 * 1 is 4 1 * 0 + 2 * 2 is 4 3 * 2 + 4 is = to 6 + 4 which is 10 and then 3 * 0 + 4 * 2 is = 8 so let's check 4 4108 that's is exactly what we have here so as you could see here the idea is that every time to follow what element I'm looking for for the c i j and then I just go to the each rows from the first Matrix and the J column from the second Matrix and I do the dot product of the A and then I and then K let's say so I'm going to the E Row from the first Matrix and I'm taking all the elements which means I don't even need to mention this index it just means the entire each row coming from the Matrix a and then I'm doing the DOT product between this row and the column that comes from the Matrix B which means B and then J which then will give me the c i so I'm looking at this and taking this multiplying this dot product and this gives me the first element then the first row and then the second column which gives me the uh second element in the first row in my Matrix so this one and so on so hope this makes sense uh if it doesn't make sure to reach out because it's a very important concept and uh let's also look into another example to make sure that we got this right so in this case as you can see we have another matrices so set of A and B matrices again 2x two a simple one and we want to know what is a so let's say we call the C we already know C should be 2 by two and what we are doing is basically for C11 we are saying let's look at the first row so first row and the First Column coming from the second Matrix B and let's do the dot product so 2 * 1 2 * 1 2 * 1 4 * 5 4 * 5 we get this and then when we want to find what is C oh what is C and then one two so in the first row but in the second element in our final Matrix so I is equal to 1 and J is equal to 2 it means we need to look at the first row from The Matrix a but this time the second column from The Matrix B so it is 2 by 3 2 by 3 4 * 7 4 * 7 and this gives us a number 34 even if you calculate you can see that 2 * 1 is equal to 2 4 * 5 is 5 so 2 4 * 5 is 20 so 2 + 20 is 22 in here and then you can do the rest of calculations and this will be a good practice to see how we can do a basic matrix multiplication the idea is actually quite straightforward when it comes to multiplying it it just it comes with a practice when we see all this uh much bigger matrices so um this is another example I will leave this one to you to complete it just uh to keep in mind we always do uh so we always look at the dimension first and here 2 * 2 and 2 * 2 which gives me an impression already what I can expect the result will be 2x two and when it comes to the uh cross elements just ensure to always look to the E row and the J column this comes Matrix a and this control Matrix B take them compute the dot product and then you will find your C uh your final result let's call it um k i j because in this case we have a matrix C already welcome to the module 4 of this course when we are talking about matrices and linear systems so in this module we are going to dive deeper into this uh idea of linear systems with matrices and solving linear systems using different techniques and specifically we are going to learn the uh concept behind solving linear systems using matrices named gaussian elimination and gausian reduction welcome to the module 4 of this course when we are talking about matrices and linear systems so in this module we are going to dive deeper into this uh idea of linear systems with matrices and solving linear systems using different techniques and specifically we are going to learn the uh concept behind solving linear systems using matrices named gausian elimination and gausian reduction so uh we are going to solve linear systems um with M equations and N unknowns using this idea of our commented coefficient Matrix and then reduce row hon forms and we are going to see many examples we are going to solve these problems and we are going to do it step by step such that this very important concept from linear algebra will be uh entirely demystified for us so we are going to learn each of these Concepts one by one and we are going to uh solve different problems like before with examples such that at the end of this module we will be clear on how we can use this idea of gaussian elimination and gaan reduction in order to solve a linear system with matrices so uh solving linear systems is crucial in your algebra for many reasons it helps to um provide this fundamental method for understanding and working with linear equations which are the uh fundamental and backbone of various mathematical but also um the applied sciences like uh statistics data science machine learning deep learning and engineer artificial intelligence so uh here is a high level overview of its importance and applications so uh it's a basic but essential part of linear algebra it introduces key Concepts such as matrices vectors determinant so we need to know um and we need to incorporate all these different concepts that we already learned as part of previous modules in here because we need to know um the idea of matrices the dimension of the matrices uh this idea of coefficients versus unknown so variables in our moral homogeneous versus non homog continues how we do the indexing so coefficient labeling in our matrices that we learned before we also need to know this uh multiplication between a matrix and a vector multiplication between Matrix and Matrix the idea of transpose and all these different topics that we saw before uh coming to this specific module so the uh solving linear systems has a wide range of applications when it comes to the um usage of it Beyond linear algebra because it's being used also as part of many other linear algebra Concepts including the um dimensionality reduction techniques uh the composition techniques like um igon values ion vectors uh all these different mathematical and linear algebra concept itself they rely on this idea of solving linear systems with matrices but we also go beyond the application mathematics when it comes to solving linear systems it's used in physics it's used in engineering um and just in general also even in finance economics uh in different uh investment strategies when we are talking about quantitative finance and using data s linear algebra in order to understand what kind of investment decisions we can make so in order to set some uh constraints or objectives and in the essence solving linear systems is kind of this getaway to both understanding deeper mathematical theories but also applying these Concepts to solve real world problem across various disciplines and domains including data analytics data science machine learning deep learning artificial intelligence and much more so without further Ado let's get started so we will start with the refreshment of this General linear system that we saw when we were beginning this uh unit so we saw that we could represent a linear system with m equations and N unknowns with this format where we said that we had this um M equations so you can see we got in total M rows and we got n unknowns which were referring to the columns so then we also saw this idea of indexing a i j where I was the index corresponding to the row and then J was the index corresponding to the column and we said that these coefficient a11 a12 up to A1 n and then the same holds for all the other equations or the rows this were ways for us to understand where exactly we are in our system what is that the variable corresponding to which we are dealing that Co coefficient and what that coefficient will basically tell us in which equation we are and corresponding to which variable or unknown we um have the coefficient because this this a11 holds entirely different information that is a23 and then this amn this amn tells us in the M equation what kind of information we know and the relationship between this when it comes to the end variable or end unknown so this a11 a12 all these AIG Js those are known because we are saying we can estimate them those are constants they come from R whereas the X1 X2 up to xn those are variables those are things that we assume that either we don't know or in the future we will see that those are basically the features that we got in our data and then this B1 and B2 up to BM so far we have been kind of ignoring them we already touched upon this when we were differentiating this idea of non-homogeneity and homogeneity of our system but in this specific module we are going to finally make this B in use we are going to make use of them and we are going to see how we can transform this General linear system into uh Concepts like matrices and vectors that we already have seen at the end of the previous module so we are going to bring all these different topics together to solve this General linear system and very uh soon it will also become much more clear why we want to do that because solving linear system it means that we are um getting an understanding uh what what is the exact relationship between these coefficients and the unknowns now keep this notation in mind where we have all these different equations you notice here the pluses so we have the common notation of equations that we know from high school and prealgebra because we are going to transform these linear systems into matrices and vectors and the products of them so we are going to go from this uh simpler notations to bit more fancy notation and we are going to bring our linear algebra into use in order to solve a system of M equations with n unknowns so let's go to that bit more advanced notation so here we go so this is the Matrix representation of linear systems and a linear system of equations can be represented compactly using these matrices so we already have seen this Matrix this is very familiar to us we have been using this a lot and this is the m by n Matrix a so this is the Matrix a you can note here we have a11 a12 up to a1n and then we uh we have all these different rows and the columns so another thing that you can quickly notice is that we are dealing with a similar dimension for Matrix a so we have M by n you can see we have M rows and we have n columns something that you can note when you are looking at the last column and the last row and then uh keeping in mind that we have always AI J where the a is the row index and then J is the column index so that gives us understanding what is the dimension of a which is M by n and then we have now a new component here which is something new here which is this Vector so we got a column Vector here X1 X2 up to xn so we already see here from the last element that most likely we are dealing with an N by one vector and how I can know this and how I can be assured by this is because first of all the index is n and secondly we already have learned for us to be able to multiply a matrix with another Matrix or Matrix with another Vector the middle elements of the two so those things they need to be the same so we have learned that the number of columns of the first multiplier in this case The Matrix a needs to be equal to the number of rows of our second multiplier in this case the number of rows of a vector X so you can see it in here so here we got n columns as part of Matrix a here we got n rows as part of vector X which does make sense which means that if we are writing like this and we are multiplying the two then we are indeed dealing with the case when those two should be the same so we are definitely safe to assume that our Vector X it needs to have n rows and only one column so of course the one could have been different but we have already seen another thing before so why do we know that this is right we are indeed dealing with a single column Vector well if we go back in here we are simply taking this system and we are trying to rewrite it in this form and what have we seen here that we only got n different unknowns something that was also given which were X1 X2 up to xn which we can also rewrite in this format X1 X2 up to xn so basically a column Vector that's exactly what we have done here so we have taken all the x's and we have put it in the vector and we are saying let's multiply this Matrix with this com vector and we will get this and how we can know this well let's first look into this first part and then we will understand why we have here this um Vector of P let me clean this up well what we have done simply here is that we have Rewritten this part this part as a multiplication of a matrix and a vector so we have said let's take this we have already learned how we can perform the multiplication between a vector and a matrix we have seen that and how we can do that now we are basically doing the opposite so we have already the final version we have all these equations you can see that we have taken a11 we have multiplied with X1 A1 2 we have multiplied with X2 and A1 n we have multiplied with xn so basically what we have done here is that we have taken the a11 a12 and then a13 dot dot dot and then A1 n we said let's take this and then multiply with X1 X2 dot dot dot xn which is basically the dot product of this row Vector with this column Vector so only the first equation can be Rewritten as a DOT product between this Vector that we see in here and this Vector all right perfect but you can say well we just got uh we not only got one equation but we got M equation this already gives us an idea what we have done in the left hand side what I just did for one equation we can also of course do for multiple equations so basically what we have done was that we have set for equation one or I can also say for I is equal to one we have taken a 1 one a12 dot dot dot a one n because we got n columns or n unknowns and we multiply this with X1 X2 dot dot dot xn and this dot product this is basically A1 vector and then T and then X if we call this X and then this if you open this up and if you calculate this you will see very quickly that you get a11 X1 plus a12 X2 do do do A1 n xn this is simply the the proof how we can go from here to here now if we do if we show the same in the same way you can actually go ahead and prove for yourself that I is equal to 1 we simply have this Vector a11 a12 dot dot dot A1 n multiplied by X1 X2 do do xn but we also have the same for I is equal 22 only with a different row Vector which is of course a21 a22 dot dot dot a 2 N and then dotproduct with X1 X2 do xent so basically the column Vector X doesn't change but we need to change the coefficient that comes because uh in each equation we have different set of coefficients corresponding to this X and not you can see that here coefficients are different their I or the row index is changing because here we have I is equal to 1 then I is equal to two dot dot do I is equal to 1 I is equal to m in the same way here we are also doing the same so here you can see we have exactly the same story only now a is equal to M for our last row which is a M1 and then a M2 dot dot dot and then a MN and then multiply so the do product with X Vector X2 dot dot dot xn given that for all these cases we got the same column Vector you can easily see see how we instead of writing down this equations as separate row vectors we have seen also the same doing previously and instead we will just create one coefficient Matrix so we can say instead of just doing this separately we're also safe to do it um in a combined way so therefore we are rewriting this all and we are saying we can rewrite all these equations now as a11 a12 dot dot dot a1n so as I had before so I'm taking just this part and I'm adding here my Comm mat com Vector that I had to multiply this um A1 T X2 dot dot dot xn so basically I'm just taking this that we had and I'm writing over in here so this is my first row but then of course I can also add there is nothing that I'm changing if I'm adding similar story only this time I'm using this second row Vector a21 a22 up to a2n because at the end of the day I'm doing similar multiplication with x in here too so a21 and then a22 dot dot dot a 2 N and then of course the same holds for a M1 a M2 for my last row and then up to a MN so if you open this up you will quickly see that what you will get is that for the first equation I will get entirely separate amount so a11 X1 plus a12 X2 dot dot dot plus A1 n xn so I'm Simply Computing the dot product between this row vector and this com Vector we have already seen how we can do a calculation like this this should seem very familiar now I'm only doing it at a scale so I'm doing I'm adding here also the second row so a21 a22 dot dot dot and then a 2 N and then here of course I forgot to add the exists so a21 * X1 plus a22 * X2 plus dot dot dot and then A2 n and then xn and then I'm doing this all the way down to the last row a M1 X1 plus a M2 X2 plus dot dot dot and then a m n xn and then what I'm doing is that I'm saying this is equal to this you are free to check it yourself um you can see that once you write down even all the smaller elements in here you will see that you are getting exactly the same this is simply uh another way of writing that you will take all these different um vectors A1 t a 2 t so transpose dot dot dot and then you also represent your last row by a vector and then you take this which is basically M by n and then you do dot product with a vector X1 and X2 dot dot dot xn and why am I allowed to do so because I have M different equations so equation one equation two dot dot dot equation three those are the coefficients of those corresponding equations and those are the unknowns and given that the unknowns are exactly the same across all the equations so as you can see here the unknowns they don't change so this means that every time I need to multiply comput the dot product between a different coefficient so a11 a12 and then it changes to a21 a23 dot dot a2n but the unknowns they do not change so the vector the unknown Vector that I need to to multiply them it doesn't change every time it's this so in here I have the same in here I have the same and in here I have the same con Vector this means that I can simply rewrite the set of dot products into a larger uh system where I have this coefficient Matrix which is a so and we are calling it coefficient Matrix we saw already before y because those are the coefficients corresponding to the unknowns we are distorting them in one place and then we are storing the unknowns X1 to xn in a con Vector because we got n unknowns and then the final piece of this puzzle is what we see in here in the right hand side after the equation sign of course I'm talking about the B so we got here B1 B2 up to BN you might have already guessed that we are uh dealing with um Vector not a matrix because we got M equations and M B which means that we can represent this as B1 B2 dot dot dot BM as a column Vector with M rows because we got here one row two row dot dot dot here M row and then by given that it's just a one column here one so basically we are saying for equation one a11 A2 a12 dot dot dot A1 and multiply it so dotproduct with X so X1 X2 up 2 xn this should be equal to B1 this is exactly what we have let me clean this up this is exactly what we have here we say a11 X1 plus a12 X2 dot dot dot A1 n xn is equal to B1 that's what we have here because we are saying the dot product of this row Vector that we have just used to rewrite this thing that product of this uh coefficient with the corresponding unnown is equal to B1 and we have already seen that it is simply this thing that we are rewriting this first equation we have is equal to B1 as you can see in here therefore when we do exactly the same it's simply equal to here B2 for the second equation dot dot dot and then here is equal to b m so given that from the left hand side here we already have seen that this is simply equal to coefficient Matrix a and then dot product with X where X is this Vector it means that we can also take over this equal sign from here and the only thing that is left from us is to represent this column Vector in here which we can call a vector B and that's exactly what is in here so we soon we'll also see the clear definition of it but for now let's see how we uh we have used this linear system in order to transform it in the notation with matrices so we have taken this C eents and we have seen that in here we can represent these coefficients as a vector a row Vector so a11 a12 a1n multiplied with a common Vector X1 X2 up to xn so this is exactly the first equation the left hand side so we say that this is the first dot product this is the second dot product after to the last row the last dot product so we have already represented this dot products as um multiplication so product of a coefficient Matrix a by column Vector containing all these unknowns X1 X2 up to xn X and we said let's take over this equal sign and given that the same logic rowwise holds also in here so we say this is Row one this is row two dot dot dot row M and everything that holds here for the rows holds here as well we need to take over everything in a consistent way therefore we are saying let's also represent this in terms of the vector if we are doing that in here therefore we are calling this a b and this PS are just real numbers B1 B2 up to BM and this is how we can transform and we can rewrite this system with M equations and N unnown into a product in terms of matrices or coefficient Matrix a a column Vector containing the n unowns and then a vector a column Vector B that contains all these different values B1 B2 up to BM so this basically rewriting what we have in here hope this makes sense but if it doesn't we are going to see this again in the definition I just wanted to warm up with this before we move on onto the uh official definition so a linear system of equations can be represented compactly using matrices and we we just saw that an M byn Matrix a multiplied by an N Vector X results in an M Vector B so you can see it in here so this is an M byn Matrix a this is the n by 1 column Vector X and this is the m by1 con Vector B and one thing that we can see very quickly is that what we are doing here is that we are transforming that uh equations into a matrix representation but nothing changes with the equations we can still write them down like that it's just by using matrices and vectors we will soon see how we can use this in order to solve this problem so why are we doing this uh when we have just two equations with two unknowns we know from high school that we can quickly solve that we can just write down for instance X1 + 2 X2 is equal to 3 and then 3 X1 + 4 X2 is 6 we can quickly solve this problem by uh you know writing down the X1 in terms of 3 and 2x2 filling that in in here in the X1 and then solving the problem because we got two equations with two unknowns the problem become much more complicated when we got three equations with three unknowns five equations with five unknowns 100 equations with 100 unknowns therefore to do this uh solving of the system of equations at the scale we need this Matrix notation and that's exactly what we are doing in here so uh let's also quickly check the dimensions such that we confirm that we are uh on the right path before moving on to the uh practical material so here we got Matrix a containing the coefficients uh from our linear system and it is let me remove this it is M by n then we got our X so this thing is a convector containing the uh unknowns in our system and it contains n rows so the X has a dimension of n by 1 is a single col vector and we are saying this is equal to and that's just given that's how we transform our linear system into this notation this is equal to a Comm Vector B and the dimension of it is M by 1 now let's check whether this makes sense we know that already and we just said that this two needs to be equal it's fine so we have the uh this uh criteria satisfied so the number of columns of Matrix a coefficient Matrix a is equal to n and then the number of rows of con Vector x with unnown is equal to n so we can indeed do the multiplication so we are correct in that notation but uh is it true to claim that indeed here we got M different rows well we have learned that if we take M byn Matrix and multiply it by n by one vector or Matrix then what we are getting is that we first take over over this so the number of rows this will become the new number of rows of our final Matrix and then M by and then this last element so the number of columns of our last item so in this case DX so it's equal to 1 this is our final number of columns so the new dimension then becomes M by 1 and what do we see here that inde the the result that we say we claim that this amount is equal to is M by 1 because if we are saying that the two amounts are equal to each other then uh naturally they should have the same Dimension so a * X will have a dimension M by 1 which is coherent to what we are claiming that is equal to which is M by one uh column Vector B all right so now when we have um refreshed our memory on that Dimensions we are ready to move on onto the next slide so now we need to solve this linear system so we need to find this set of unknowns that will help us to identify and clarify all the unknowns in our system so one way and the INF famous way of solving this linear system is what we are referring as gausian elimination gausian elimination is the systematic method for solving linear systems it basically transforms this system into what are referring us row Ulin form from which the solutions can be more easily identified so in the next couple of slides and uh lessons we are going to learn this idea of elimination we will understand why is it actually called elimination which is quite intuitive on once we see the examples and also we are going to learn this idea of row H form reduce row form because those are very important Concepts to ENT this entire idea of solving linear systems using linear algebra so before moving on onto that we need to know the basics one of which is the idea of argumented coefficient Matrix so by definition the argumented coefficient Matrix of linear systems a XB uh combines the coefficient Matrix a and the vector B into one Matrix so you can see here the Matrix a and then we have here the straight line and then B this is basically this entire argumented coefficient matrix it's a fancy way of saying let's take all the unknowns from our system which are the coefficient in our system and then the constant uh in the B so I have to say not nouns but rather uh the uh values so the scalers coefficients and let's take the coefficients um in our system which are represented in our coefficient Matrix and let's combine this with the information that we got in our system which is the B1 B2 up to BM and let's combine the two and we call it argument coefficient Matrix so we are simply taking the coefficient Matrix a you can see a11 a12 up to a1n and then also in the last row am1 am2 amn this should look very familiar because it's just simply this Matrix Matrix a we are taking it over in here and then we are saying let's draw a straight line and then add here the uh column Vector our result Vector which is B so we saw in here that is this thing so let's take this part in this part put a straight line in between and this will become our new Matrix matx so as you might have already guessed in the a in The Matrix a in the coefficient we got M rows and N columns which means that our new Matrix will have at least M rows and at least n columns now given that we are adding yet another column at the end it means that the number of columns will increase but one thing that is important to note is that the number of rows will not increase because both the coefficient Matrix and the coln vector B they have the same amount of rows they both got uh just m rows so let me actually rewrite this so we know that a is M by n so it has M rows and N columns and we know that b is M by 1 which means that it got M rows and M uh N1 call this means that if we combine horizontally so if we put them together next to each other the coefficient Matrix A and B this means that we will end up with the same rows so we still have M rows but now we will have n + one so here are the N columns from n from uh our coefficient Matrix a and here yet another extra one column that comes from the uh Vector B therefore we get the argument coefficient Matrix that has a dimension M by n + 1 so this Matrix is key when we are applying these different raw operations to solve our system of M equations and N unknowns so we are basically bringing all these values in order to solve our problem and find the unknowns now before moving on onto actual uh definition of row H form RF I wanted to provide here an example so how we go from uh from this system of equations into this uh new form a uh * X is equal to B and then how we can represent our Matrix into this idea of argumented coefficient Matrix so let's assume we have the following system of equations so we got X1 + 2 x 2 + X3 + X4 is equal to 7 and then we got X1 + 2 X2 + 2 x3 - X4 is = to 12 and then 2 X1 + 4 X2 and then + 6 x 4 is = to 4 let's now first just write this equations with three equations and then four unknowns into this system where we transform this into this matrices and the vectors so let's write it in this format of a xal to B that we saw before and then we will also write this in the um argument coefficient Matrix so given that I know that we have three equations and four unknowns the first thing that I will do is that I will get my coefficient Matrix a so for a what I need to do is that first I need to understand what is the dimension of it and how can I know the dimension I know that it should be M byn from the Theory where m is the number of equations the number of rows and N is the number of unknowns I got three equations for unknowns so this is 1 2 3 and four X1 X2 X3 X4 those are my unknowns this means that I already know exactly what the dimension of my coefficient Matrix a should be which should be three by 4 let's now go in and search those values and filling in here to get our coefficient Matrix so here I see that X1 has a coefficient of one so whenever you don't see here a value it means we have one times that variable because one * a number is simply that number so here I got one and then uh for 2 X2 I got two for X3 I got one and then for x four I also got one and do keep in mind that in the columns I have to have the coefficients corresponding to this unknowned X1 X to ext4 this will be kind of a guide mentally to check every time whether we are dealing with the right coefficients so now we go on to our second equation or our second draw which means I got one in here see here one and then two two and then minus one and then here for my third dra third equation I got two for X1 I got four for my X2 I got nothing for my X3 which means that it is 0er because 0 * a variable is equal to zero and then finally for my X4 I got six so now I have my coefficient Matrix we can rewrite very quickly the common Vector containing the unknowns we already know what the dimension of it should be because we have four uh unknowns so it should be 4 by one by one and it is X1 X2 X3 and X4 and this is my X and finally I see what my B is here so we got three equations so we remember that the dimension should be M by 1 which is corresponding to what we also see here it's coherent we got three Bs for three equations so therefore I'm saying my B is equal to it is 3x one con vector and is equal to 7 12 and 4 now the final result is simply let me rewrite this in the form that we just saw so I can write this equations the system of three equations with four announce as 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 - 1 2 4 0 6 multiplied by X1 X2 X3 and X4 equal to 7 12 and 4 this is in the a x is equal to B Matrix notation so this is the first part now we know how we can rewrite the system of linear equations with uh M equations and N unknowns into this form of a x is equal to B let's now try the next step which is writing this um system uh rewriting it into this argumented coefficient Matrix so I want to get this a b this one is actually quite straightforward now when we have our a and the B because what this argumented coefficient Matrix represents it's simply taking the Matrix a and then adding the vector B next to it in order to get our final uh a plus b Matrix so not a plus b but basically a and then next to it the B so what is my a it is this thing so it is 1 one 2 and then 2 2 4 I'm just taking over this 1 2 0 1 - one and then 6 so now this is the a with three rows and then four columns and then here I'm simply putting this straight line like in here and then putting the b in there and the B was this so 7 12 and 4 so 7 12 and 4 this is the B which was 3x one 3 by 1 so one column and then three rows which means that this final Matrix The argumented Matrix a b it should have three rows and five columns so it's really important to um distinguish the multiplication and this unique form which is called uh the argumented coefficient Matrix so here we are not multiplying or adding we are simply taking the coefficient Matrix that we just found a next to the VOR B and given that they both have the same rows that's very straightforward and easy so this is about the argumented coefficient Matrix let's now move on to the next concept which is the row etum form or RF in short so Matrix a is in a row etum form if all nonzero rows are above any rows of all zeros so all nonzero rows are above any rows of all zeros each leading and entry of a row is to the right of the leading entry of the row above it and all entries in a column below a leading entry are zeros the leading entry in each row is known as the pivot or corner corner entry now this is a whole mouthful and um the concept itself is not straightforward when it comes to this definition but once we do the actual examples all this concept will be clear and when we solve these multiple problems and we are going to solve like three till five problems it will become easier to understand this concept of row H form what we mean by pivot or Corner entry or pivot uh uh Vector what we mean by uh having all these entries in a column below a leading entry zeros or what we mean with this concept of all nonzero rows being above any rows of all zeros so in terms of the words uh this might seem bit complicated and it is but when we look into the example this concept will be demystified so um once we have the RF which will be uh will uh come back in a bit and we will look into the example to clarify this definition let's quickly look at the next step that we need to perform which is the reduced row Edon form so here you can see that this reduced is what is basically added in front of the row H form so this was the row H form that we will now uh be discussing and then once the row H form is done we basically do a reduced row H form so that is the next step and by definition a matrix is in reduced row H form if in addition to the row H form so RAF we also have every leading entry in a row that is uh equal to one also we are calling that we have leading one and each leading one is the only nonzero entry in its column so r r EF or the reduced R HL form it simplifies the system for easier solution derivation so in terms of explaining or in terms of formulating the uh RF doesn't really uh sound that convincing because we need to demystify all these different concepts so my suggestion would be let's move actual to the actual practical problem problem and once we solve this step by step with all these details all these different criteria this one 2 and three and then the four and the fifth criteria they will be domestify and will be very clear to you let's now solve another problem a similar one to what we just solved only uh this time we will go a bit faster through all these steps just to ensure that our understanding of solving a linear system with this multiple equations and multiple unknowns using this idea of gaan elimination reduction and all these different steps up to the point of the redu through form we can go through quickly and we will ensure that uh we end up uh with the solution uh to the system using those techniques that we have just learned so here is my system of three equations and three unknowns this time and like we learned before the first step is to transform this into this argumented Matrix but first of course I need to know what is my a and what is my B because uh transforming this and writing this in the um argumented Matrix form a and then B it means I need to know what is my a and what is my B so let's write the first that down so my step one in this case is to write it in the argumented so argumented Matrix and for that I need to know what is my a so my a is equal to 1 1 1 and then 2 3 1 and then 1 - one and 2 this is my a which I take from all these coefficients that I see in here and then my B I can see in here from all this values so it is 6 14 and 8 this means that my argumented Matrix is a and then B and it's equal 2 1 1 1 and then 2 3 1 and then 1 - 1 and then two then straight line and then 6 14 and 8 this is my augumented Matrix this is my first step so let me go ahead and remove this details because then I can take this over and I can then simply continue so my argumented Matrix is then 1 1 1 and then 2 3 and then 1 1 Min - one and then 2 and then I have the values for my B which is 64 14 and 8 all right so first step is done now we are ready to go on to the next step step two which is to apply all sorts of operations and ideally by every time normalizing each row so every time ensuring that here the leading entries are once we call it normalization and then by elimination so we saw that every time we were eliminating some of the variables to ensure that we will end up with the zeros in the uh lower diagonal of our argument Matrix and we will have only the leading ones in our um only a single one and a leading pivot value so the pivot entry in our argument Matrix per column it will be the only element that will be uh non zero and the r should be all Z so here I'm talking about performing all these different operations to ensure that we uh create and we come to this point of the row eelin form and then from there we will go to the reduceed row eelin form so the r RF that we saw before so let's do that so the step two will be to uh get the RF of a or rather I have to say R RF maybe we can combine the two uh and do it at the same time so for that what I will do is that like before I would just draw this line because this will help me to keep track of all the operations that I'm performing later on to uh to check one thing that we can notice here that the first dra is already normalized which means that I have a one in here so I'm happy with that I won't do anything to it so uh what I need to do is to move on on t uh on the elimination of this um X1 from the row two and Row three so I need to find a way to ensure that this entries become zero because I want to get here one0 0 so I want to have a single pivot entry in here and the remaining values in this column under this one should become zero so how can I do that the first thing that I can do to eliminate this X1 from row two is subtract from this two times the row one so you can see that if I take this row two so this is my row two this is my Row one and oh this is my row two this is my Row one and this is my Row three if I take row two this is my step 1 row two is equal 2 and then I take the row two and I subtract from this 2 * Row one let me remove this to open up some space so if I take this this row and subtract two times this one then what I will get is 2 - 2 * 1 which is 0o 3 - 2 * 1 so 3 - 2 is 1 and then 1 - 2 * 1 which is -1 and then when it comes to the value of b 14 - 2 * 6 so 14 - 12 is 2 so this is what I'm getting and then given that I have already a normalized first row so I have already one in here I will just take this over for now and then for the last column for the R3 in order to normalize that one and in order to get R of this one from here so first thing I want to do is to eliminate the X1 from here which means I need to get rid of this one and how can I do that I can simply take the Row three so R3 and I can subtract from the R3 the R1 because both have one in here and this one I can simply take this and then remove and then subtract from this the first row I can uh then end up with basically a zero so here if I take this one I got this one and then I subtract from this 1 * 1 so 1 - 1 is 0 - 1 - 1 is - 2 2 - 1 is 1 and then 8 - 6 is two this is what I get after performing this eliminations hence also the name um gausian elimination so using this elimination s we are then getting rid of certain elements and certain variables so this is what we get after performing these row operations and now we are ready to go on to the next stage so we see now that the um in this specific case the row two is already normalized which means that here we already have a one so we are happy with that we want it to be like that so I already see another coefficient that I want to get rid of that I want to eliminate from uh X2 which is this one so I want to get rid of this minus 2 and I want it to become a zero and one way that I can do that is to take this Row three and then add two * row two to this Row three so why am I not taking Row one because row one has a one in here and if I take that I will then um basically um bring me back to the point where I have I'm having here an element because zero and then uh adding something that uh is related to this first row or subtracting from it a multiple of this first row it will always lead me here this zero becoming a nonzero value that's something that I want to avoid therefore I want to perform some sort of oper to this Row three by using row two because that's my only way to eliminate this minus 2 from here without hurting my zero here and therefore I'm looking at this row that already contains the zero here so that's great and I'm going to use row two to eliminate this minus two and the way that I can do it given that here I have a minus so I have minus 2 I need to add to this 2 * Row 2 so in the step number two I will then say that my R3 is equal to R3 and then plus 2 * R2 so let's go ahead and see what that gives us so 0 0 + 2 * 0 is 0 and then - 2 + 2 * 1 is - 2 + 2 which is zero so I'm already getting rid of the minus 2 which is great that's exactly what I wanted and then 1 here I have a one so 1 + 2 * - 1 so 1 + 2 * -1 that gives me 2 - 2 or 1 - 2 which is minus1 so I'm getting here a minus1 and then here when it comes down to the B element so I'm talking about this specific element so 2 and then plus 2 * 2 2 so 2 + 4 is equal to 6 so here I'm getting a six okay perfect so let me take over the row number two it's already normalized so I already have a one in here so 0 1 and then minus 1 and here I got a two so I just simply take over I'm not doing anything at this stage to that row number two so oh now the question is whether there is something that I need to do to my Row one well the question is yes because in our definition we saw that we wanted to have um this element ideally being zero because we need to have here a zero for this column to have a single element of one in the pivot entry which is this one which means that I need to make somehow this element one that we see in the row one being equal to zero at this stage let's see how we can achieve that so we got a one in here and we got a one in here so one thing that we can do is to take Row one and subtract from that row to in that case I won't do anything to my first entry my pivot my Pivot entry for my first row I won't do anything to it because 1 minus 0 is 1 but then I will get rid of this one because 1 - 1 is equal to Z so let's go ahead and do that so R1 is = to R1 - R2 so in that way if I do 1 - 0 I'm ending up with 1 1 - 1 is = to 0 so I'm getting what I just wanted and then 1 minus -1 it is 2 because it becomes + one + 1 and then 6 - 2 becomes 4 so this one becomes four this is the end result after performing these operations in Step number two perfect so now uh let's see what else we got in here that we want to change let me make this line longer all right so there is something that I still want to do in order to normalize the last row because here instead of having one I have minus one so firstly I need to multiply this row by one simply by a scaler in order to ensure that I can have one in here instead of just minus one so in Step number three I will do R3 is equal to -1 * R3 so I will get 0 0 1 given and then 6 * -1 is - 6 now what else we need to do uh in terms of the rest of the values in our uh argumented Matrix so we got one let me actually write it over such that we see what is going on so I'm taking over this and then minus one and then here I got two then here we got 1 Z 2 and then 4 all right so this is our argumented Matrix and there are few elements that we want to get rid of it is this element and this one because we want them to be equal to zero and how we can do that so we got two things to eliminate we want to eliminate from the row one this two and we want to eliminate from this row uh to this minus one how can we do that well for this Row one we can already see that we got here this one from row three so it's super helpful in that aspect so we can use that in order to get rid of that R2 so let me actually write it down in the uh step four so step number four what we can do is to take R1 and it will be equal to R1 minus 2 * R3 because here here I got one and I can use this one in order to get rid of this two so 2 - 2 * 1 is equal to uh 2 - 2 * 1 is equal to 0 so I can get a zero in here and that's exactly what we want to do we want to eliminate this x3e so we want to eliminate this from here this two from this first row that's something that we can achiev by this and another thing that I can also see let me free up some space in here to write down these equations so remove this given that the steps are already written you can always replicate that so then the new augmented Matrix a will become so here 0 0 and then one I'm living the last R it is already in a uh format that is desired so I will leave that there and then I'm going to update my first row so first row R1 is equal to R1 - 2 * R3 which means it's equal to 1 - 2 * 0 is 1 0 - 2 * 0 is 0 2 - 2 * 1 is equal to 0 and then 4 - 2 * - 6 so 4 - 2 2 * - 6 is equal to 4 and then + 12 which is 16 so I'm getting a 16 here and then for the second row I also need to do elimination to get R this time me remove this this time I want to get rid of this minus one because then I will have um criteria satisfied that this should also be zero because this should be zero for this pivot to be the only nonzero element in this column tree only then I can say that I'm dealing with r RF so that I have my Matrix in the reduced row Edon form so for that what I'm going to do is I'm going to make use of my third row again so I'm going to take row two and I'm going subtract from row two I'm actually going to add Row three to it because here I have minus one and if I have - one to 1 I will just get a zero so for that I'm going to write that uh for the elimination so for eliminating each tree from the second row I'm going to write that R R2 is equal to R2 + R3 so then I'm going to get here 0 + 0 is 0 1 + 0 is 1 and then -1 + 1 is zero now why I have used actually the third drawing not the first one because I want to ensure that I want do anything to my zero in here if I do something with this first row then I cannot do that I cannot reach that it's just counterintuitive because I want to keep my work intact I have worked uh in such a way that I can eliminate this X1 from the second dra and that's something that I don't want to go back to instead I want to use something that is in the column three to get rid of this volum and that's something that we could do by using this element so we always look at the shortest and easiest path to get rid of a coefficient in our Matrix in our argumented Matrix now let's see what is left so R2 is equal to R2 + R3 which means that we need to add this two to this minus 6 and 2 + - 6 is equal to -4 - 4 there we go so after performing all the steps we end up with the following argumented Matrix and if you can notice here we not just achieved the row HED love form but we have actually achieved the reduced row hen form of our a this is that form because we have on the entry so our pivots are the ones in here and we can see that all the criteria are satisfied so here on the lower diagonal so the lower part of our Matrix are zeros and on the top of that also all the elements in this columns they are all zero except of the pivot values and they are all equal to one and that's exactly what we wanted to have in order to say that we are dealing with the reduced row Eon form perfect so now we are ready to move on to the last final step to get this solution and unlike the previous system which was bit more complicated and it had multiple infinite solutions so you might recall this example where we had to describe the final solution using this X2 and X3 because depending on different values of X2 and X3 which could take infinite values we then could get a different um solution for our x uh Vector so we we saw that when for instance the X1 is equal to 1 and X4 is equal to 3 then our solution was this but then of course if the uh x 2 and X4 were different we would have gotten another solution and the result of the linear system had infinite number of solution unlike that one this one this example is much more convenient because even from the RF of this so row reduced row form of the uh Matrix a we can already see what is the solution of this problem of this linear system we had three equations and three unknowns so we actually got to single Solution that's something that I can already see from here and let's uh break it down to see how um I see that solution so we transformed this to a system of equations so we are basically doing it backwards and now after getting this RF of Matrix a we are going going back and we are going to rewrite the system with the unknowns X1 X2 and X3 so here I see one which means that the coefficient of X1 is 1 so 1 X1 which I will just write X1 X1 so I get X1 X1 + 0 * X2 + 0 * X3 is equal to 16 and then 0 * X1 + 1 * X2 + 0 * X3 I'm writing down this zero such that it will make sense what we are doing and in case next time you have a different system it will be easier to follow so 0 * X1 + 0 * X2 plus Z plus 1 * X3 is = to -6 now what is this we get rid of all these zeros so you can already see what is going on we are ending up with X1 is equal to 16 X2 is = to -4 and X3 is equal to - 6 there we go so we got our solution for X which is X1 X2 X3 is equal to 16 - 4 - 6 this is the unique solution to our problem and if we clean this up and we write down in a nicer term so I'm going to remove this then we can say that the solution for our problem so this problem that we saw in here so the X which is equal to X1 X2 X3 it's equal to 16 - 4 - 6 which you can see it also here so one trick is always to look into in here if you have the identity Matrix part of your argument Matrix then you have a unique solution to your problem so you got three rows and you got three column and you have all these identity so these unit vectors then this the indication that you got a unique solution to your problem and that solution is simply this column as you can see in here so next time when you have something like this you don't even need to rewrite the transformation back to the equations you can directly say that the solution to your system with these three equations and three unknowns is this one so this column Vector equal with this entry 16 - 4 and - 6 and that's the end of this problem so in this way we have learned how we can quickly solve this type of problems by just following this uh common procedure and this ended up with a unique solution so you can have cases when you will not have any solution and that will be the case when we saw before two so in case um there is an equation says that um in the left hand side you have zeros but then in the right hand side you have a number so you end up with 0 is equal to two number let's say eight this this cannot happen which means that you are saying your system doesn't have any solutions so let's let me actually write it down so you can have three possible cases case one when you end up with one of your um equations and here you got numbers let's say 3 4 5 and here this is zero so basically you end up saying 0 is equal to 5 which is not something that is possible so you say the solution solution is this so it doesn't exist it is also possible that you have case two when um like in the previous case that we saw before in this example you don't have um the um you don't have all the uh unknowns expressed in terms of the other ones which means that you don't have a unique solution to your system so you can even see that from here therefore you have your X2 and X4 so you describe your final solution as a linear combination of some of the uh variables that can take infinite amount of uh vol so X2 can be anything and X4 can be anything which means that your Solutions will also be infinite so this case two will have infinite amount of solutions and the case three is the case that we saw before right now when we end up with this identity Matrix in here and this corresponding uh amounts in here so this gives us indication that we got just single solution so single solution a solution to your general linear systems 

