Limits at Infinity and Graphs.
x goes through arbitrarily large positive and negative values.
You may have touched on these ideas before in the past when you studied horizontal asymptotes.
But in this video, we'll talk about the same ideas in the language of limits.
In this first example, what happens to the function f of x drawn below as x go through larger and larger positive numbers?
Well, the arrow here on the end is supposed to mean the trend continues.
So as x gets bigger and bigger, the values of y, that is f of x, get closer and closer to one, we can write this in the language of limits by saying the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x is equal to one.
Now what happens to this function as x goes through larger and larger negative numbers, by larger and larger negative numbers, I mean numbers that are negative but are larger and larger in magnitude.
So for example, negative five, negative 10, negative 100, and negative a million and so on.
Well, assuming this trend continues, it looks like f of x, even though it's oscillating, it's settling down at a value of two.
So we say that the limit as x goes to negative infinity, of f of x equals to limits in which x goes to infinity, or negative infinity are called limits at infinity.
The phrase limits at infinity should be contrasted with the phrase infinite limits.
An infinite limit means that the y values, or the F of X values go to infinity, or negative infinity.
limits and infinity correspond to horizontal asymptotes, as drawn above, while infinite limits correspond to vertical asymptotes.
The only exception to this when we don't have a horizontal or vertical asymptote is when x and f of x are both going infinite at the same time, we'll see an example of this on the next page.
Let's figure out the limits of infinity for these two functions, g of x and h of x.
The function g of x is actually the function e to the minus x, and it has a horizontal asymptote, heading right here at y equals zero.
So the limit as x goes to infinity of g of x equals zero.
But as we head to the left, and x goes through larger and larger negative values, our Y values don't settle down to a particular finite value, they get arbitrarily large.
And so we say that the limit as x goes to minus infinity of g of x is equal to infinity.
Now let's look at the graph of y equals h of x.
Please pause the video for a moment and try to figure out the limits of infinity for this function.
The limit as x goes to infinity of h of x is negative infinity.
Because as x goes to infinity, the y values get below or more negative than any finite number.
Now as X goes to negative infinity, the y values oscillate, and never settle down at a particular number.
So we say that the limit as x goes to minus infinity of h of x does not exist.
Finally, let's look at some limits of infinity of functions without looking at their graphs first, to find the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x.
Let's think about what happens to one over x.
As x gets bigger and bigger through positive numbers.
As x gets bigger and bigger, one over x gets smaller and smaller.
So the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x equals zero.
To find the limit of one over x as x goes to negative infinity, let's look at what happens as X goes to negative numbers that are larger and larger in magnitude.
Now one of our x goes through numbers that are negative, but they're still getting smaller and smaller.
magnitude.
So the limit as x goes to negative infinity of one over x is also zero.
We can use similar reasoning to find the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x cubed.
As x goes to infinity, x cubed also goes to infinity.
So one of our x cubed has to go to zero.
To find the limit as x goes to infinity of one over the square root of x, notice that as x goes to infinity, the square root of x still goes to infinity.
So one over the square root of x also goes to zero.
In other words, both of these limits are equal to zero.
Both of these examples are actually closely related, because both have the form of the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x to the R, where R is a number greater than zero.
In the second example, the square root of x is really x to the R, where R is one half.
In fact, the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x to the R is always equal to zero.
Whenever R is bigger than zero, we can even say the same thing about the limit as x goes to negative infinity of one over x to the R.
As long as we avoid exponents, like one half that don't make sense for negative numbers.
But for other values of r, as x goes to negative infinity, x to the R is getting bigger and bigger and magnitude.
And so one over x to the R is getting smaller and smaller and magnitude and heading towards zero.
Notice that this is no longer true.
if r is less than zero, for example, something like r equals negative two, because one over x to the minus two is really x squared.
And the limit as x goes to infinity of x squared is going to be infinity, not zero.
In this video, we looked at examples of limits as x goes to infinity, and x goes to minus infinity.
And we saw that those limits could be zero.
Any other number, infinity, negative infinity, or not exist.
This video gives some algebraic techniques for computing the limits