Continuity at a Point.
the past, you may have heard an informal definition of continuity.
Something like a function is continuous, if you can draw it without ever picking up your pencil.
In this video, we'll develop a more precise definition of continuity based on limits.
It can be helpful to look at some examples of functions that are discontinuous, that is functions that fail to be continuous.
In order to better understand what it means to be continuous.
Please pause this video and try to draw graphs of at least two different functions that fail to be continuous in different ways.
One common kind of discontinuity is called a jump discontinuity.
A function has a jump discontinuity, if its graph separates the two pieces with a jump in between them.
This particular function can be described as a piecewise defined function with two linear equations, f of x equals to x when x is less than or equal to one, and f of x equals negative x plus two, when x is greater than one.
Another common kind of discontinuity is called a removable discontinuity.
You may have encountered these before, when you learned about rational functions with holes in them, for example, the function f of x equals x minus three squared times x minus four divided by x minus four, which has a hole when x equals four, and otherwise looks like the graph of x minus three squared.
This kind of discontinuity is called removable, because you could get rid of it by plugging the hole just by defining F to have an appropriate value when x equals four.
So in this case, you'd want f of x to be the same when x is not equal to four, but you'd want it to have the value of one when x equals four.
And that would amount to plugging the hole and making it continuous.
In this original example, our function had a removable discontinuity because it wasn't defined when x equals four.
But a function could also have a removable discontinuity, because it's defined in the wrong place at x equals four, for example, too high or too low, to fit the trend of f.
a discontinuity can also occur at a vertical asymptote, where it's called an infinite discontinuity.
For example, the rational function g of x is one over x minus two has an infinite discontinuity at x equals two.
Occasionally, you may encounter a discontinuity is that don't look like any of these.
For example, the graph of the function y equals cosine of one over X has a wild discontinuity at x equals zero, because of the wild oscillating behavior there.
So for a function to be continuous at x equals a, we need it to avoid all of these problems.
To avoid a jump discontinuity, we can insist that the functions limit has to exist at x equals a way to avoid a hole or removable discontinuity, we can insist that F has to be defined at x equals A to avoid the other kind of removable discontinuity in which f of a is defined, but it's in the wrong place.
We can insist that the limit of f of x as x goes to a has to equal f of a.
Sometimes the definition of continuity is written with just the third condition, and the first two conditions are implied.
Notice that these three conditions not only exclude jump this continuity and removal this continuity is they also exclude infinite discontinuities and wild discontinuities.
For example, in our third example, the function can't be continuous at x equals two, because it fails to have a limit at x equals two and it fails to have a value at x equals two.
In our wild, this continuity example, the limit also fails to exist at x equals zero, so the function can't be continuous there.
So what are the places where this function f is not in us and why, please take a moment to think about it for yourself.
The functions not continuous at negative three, because the function is simply not defined there, the functions not continuous at x equals one, because of that jump discontinuity.
In the language of limits, we say that the limit of f of x does not exist, when x equals two, the limit of the function exists and equals three, but the value of the function is down here at negative one.
So the function is not continuous, because the limit doesn't equal the value at x equals three, the function is not continuous, because once again, the limit doesn't exist.
Notice that x equals negative two.
Even though the function turns a corner, the function still continuous.
Because the limit exists and equals two, and the value of the function is also two.
The function drawn here is not continuous at x equals negative two, because the limit doesn't exist at x equals negative two, the limit from the left is one, while the limit from the right is zero.
But it is true that the value of the function at x equals negative two is equal to the limit of the function from the left side.
That is, f of negative two is equal to the limit as x goes to negative two from the left of f of x.
Notice that we can't say the same thing about the right limit.
The limit from the right is zero, while the value of the function is one, and those are equal.
In this situation, we say that f is continuous from the left, but not from the right.
By the same reasoning at x equals one, the function is not continuous, but it is continuous from the right, because the limit from the right is equal to the value of the function.
Notice that f is not continuous from the left here, because the limit from the left is about one and a half, while the value of the function is one.
In general, we say that a function f is continuous from the left at x equals j.
If the limit as x goes to a from the left of f of x is equal to f of a, and a function is continuous from the right at x equals a.
If the limit as x goes to a from the right of f of x equals f of a, in practical terms of function is continuous from the left if the endpoint is included on the left piece, and a function is continuous from the right, if the endpoint is included on the right piece.
This video gave a precise definition of continuity at a point in terms of limits.
Namely, a function is continuous at the point x equals a.
If the limit as x goes to a of the function is equal to the functions value at A.
In a previous video, we gave a definition for continuity at a point.
In this video, 