Limits using Algebraic Tricks.
tricks.
All these limits are of the zero over zero indeterminate form kind.
Recall that this means that the limits are of the form the limit of f of x over g of x where the limit of f of x equals zero and the limit of g of x also equals zero.
For a first example, let's look at the limit as x goes to one of x cubed minus one over x squared minus one.
Notice that the numerator and the denominator are both going to zero as x goes to one.
To calculate this limit, we want to simplify this expression.
And one way to simplify it is to factor it.
So let's rewrite this as the limit as x goes to one of x minus one times x squared plus x plus one.
We're factoring the numerator here is a difference of cubes.
We can also factor the denominator as a difference of squares, x minus one times x plus one.
Now, as long as x is not equal to one, we can cancel out these two factors of x minus one.
And so the limit of this expression is just the same as the limit of this expression.
Now we can just plug in one, because plugging in one gives us a numerator of three and a denominator of two.
And that way, we've evaluated our limits.
Next, let's look at the limit of five minus z quantity squared minus 25.
All divided by z.
Once again, when we plug in x equals zero in the numerator, we get zero and then nominator we also get zero.
This time instead of factoring, the trick is going to be to multiply out.
So let's rewrite this limit as the limit as t goes to zero of 25 minus 10 z plus z squared minus 25.
I just distributed to get this expression divided by z.
Since 25 minus 25 is zero, I just have the limit as t goes to zero of negative 10 z plus c squared over z.
Now what?
Well, I could factor out the Z here.
One z is not zero, I can cancel here.
So my original limit is the same as this limit.
Plugging in z equals zero, I just get negative 10 as my answer.
This third example is also a situation where the numerator is going to zero, and the denominator is also going to zero.
In this case, I'm going to try to simplify the expression by adding together the fractions and the numerator.
So I'll need a common denominator, which is r plus three, times three.
So rewriting, I get the limit of one over r plus three, I multiply that by three over three, in order to get the appropriate common denominator, minus 1/3, which I have to multiply by R plus three over r plus three, all that over are continuing to rewrite, I have in the numerator, adding together these fractions mature, have the denominator of R plus three times three, I get three minus quantity r plus three.
And then this entire fraction is still divided by our distributing the negative sign, I have three minus r minus three divided by R plus three times three, all divided by R.
three minus three is zero.
So I can rewrite this as negative r over r plus three, times three.
And now instead of dividing by r, which is r of r one, I can multiply by the reciprocal, one over R.
R divided by R is one.
So this expression simplifies to negative one, over r plus three, times three.
So finally, I'm in a good position, because now I can just go ahead and let our go to zero.
And by plugging in R equals zero, I have a limit of negative one over zero plus three times three, or negative one, nine.
This example is a little tricky, because involve square roots can be hard to deal with.
Well, there's one nice trick for dealing with square roots that works here, which is the conjugate.
So I'm going to take the expression that we're given, and multiply by the conjugate of the numerator, in this case, because the numerator is the place where the square root is by the conjugate of A minus B, I just mean a plus b conjugate of A plus B is a minus b.
Well, of course, if I multiply on the numerator, by something, I also have to multiply the denominator by the same thing, so that I won't alter the value of the expression.
So this limit here is equal to the limit of the expression down here that looks more complicated, than in a moment, if we're lucky, things will clear up and become simpler.
So Multiplying the numerators across, I get the square root of x plus three squared.
I get plus two times the square root of x plus three minus two times the square root of x plus three minus four.
On the denominator, I get x times the square root of x plus three plus 2x minus the square root of x plus three minus two.
Let's see what simplifies here.
So the square root of x plus three squared is just x plus three.
And I see that this expression and this expression are opposites, so they subtract to zero here.
So on the numerator, I just have x plus three, and then I still have the minus four on the denominator, nominator looks a little messy.
I'll just copy it over for now.
Okay, so on my numerator, I'm getting x minus one.
Notice that when x goes to one, that numerator is still going to zero.
And in fact, as I let x go to one, that denominator, if I plug in here, everything is gonna also cancel out to zero.
So I still got a zero over zero indeterminate form.
But maybe I can use one of the previous tricks of factoring.
Because look at here, if I factor an X out of these two expressions as a square root of x plus three out of these two expressions, and I could maybe factor a two out of these two, factoring by grouping, let's try that.
So we have x squared of x plus three times x minus one from these two expressions, and then I have a plus two times x minus one.
From these two expressions, this is looking promising.
So now I've got an x minus one on the top.
And if I factor out the x minus one from each of these two expressions, I'm going to have an x minus one on the bottom times the square root of x plus three, plus two.
Now, for x values near one, but not equal to one, I can cancel those.
And my limit simplifies to just one over square root of x plus three plus two, plugging in one, I get a one on the numerator, and square root of four, which is two plus two, four on the denominator, and we have calculated this limit.
Last example here, another zero over zero indeterminate form.
Anytime I see an absolute value, I'm going to want to take cases, because the absolute value of X plus five naturally follows in the cases, if X plus five is greater than zero, in other words, x is greater than negative five, then the absolute value of this positive number is just itself.
On the other hand, if X plus five is less than zero, in other words, x is less than negative five, than the absolute value of a negative number is its opposite.
And we make the expression x plus five, turn it into its opposite by putting a negative sign in front.
Now let's look at one sided limits.
As x goes to negative five from the left, we have a situation where x is less than negative five, this situation right here.
And so we can rewrite the absolute value by taking the negative of the expression.
We still have a zero over zero and determinant form.
But if we use the old factoring trick, factor out a two cancel, we got the limit of two over negative one, which is just negative two.
We do the same exercise on the right side.
When we're on the right, then x is greater than negative five.
So we're in this situation here, where we can just replace the absolute value with the stuff inside and again factoring the numerator and canceling the X plus five We just get a limit of two.
So we have a left limit, and a right limit that are different.
And so in this example, the limit does not exist.
So we've seen a five different kinds of limits all of the zero or zero indeterminate form.
And we've used five different methods to evaluate them.
For the first example, we use factoring.
For the second example, do the opposite of factoring, we multiplied out.
For the third example, we added together our rational expressions to simplify things.
The next example uses the old multiply by the conjugate trick.
And the last example, we used cases and looked at one sided limits.
