Maximums and Minimums.
equals 16?
And the answer is four.
Please pause the video and try some of these other examples.
log base two of two is asking, What power do you raise to two to get to?
And the answer is one.
Two to the one equals two.
log base two of one half is asking two to what power gives you one half?
Well, to get one half, you need to raise two to a negative power.
So that would be two to the negative one.
So the answer is negative one.
log base two of 1/8 means what power do we raise to two in order to get 1/8.
Since one eight is one over two cubed, we have to raise two to the negative three power to get one over two cubed.
So our exponent is negative three, and that's our answer to our log expression.
Finally, log base two of one is asking to to what power equals one, or anything raised to the zero power gives us one, so this log expression evaluates to zero.
Notice that we can get positive negative and zero answers for our logarithm expressions.
Please pause the video and figure out what these logs evaluate to to work out log base 10 of another Again, notice that a million is 10 to the sixth power.
Now we're asking the question, What power do we raise tend to to get a million?
So that is what power do we raise 10?
to to get 10 to the six?
Well, of course, the answer is going to be six.
Similarly, since point O one is 10 to the minus three, this log expressions, the same thing as asking, what's the log base 10 of 10 to the minus three?
Well, what power do you have to raise 10?
to to get 10 to the minus three?
Of course, the answer is negative three.
Log base 10 of zero is asking, What power do we raise 10 to to get zero.
If you think about it, there's no way to raise 10 to an exponent get zero.
Raising 10 to a positive exponent gets us really big positive numbers.
Raising 10 to a negative exponent is like one over 10 to a power that's giving us tiny fractions, but they're still positive numbers, we're never going to get zero.
Even if we raised 10 to the zero power, we'll just get one.
So there's no way to get zero and the log base 10 of zero does not exist.
If you try it on your calculator using the log base 10 button, you'll get an error message.
Same thing happens when we do log base 10 of negative 100.
We're asking 10 to what power equals negative 100.
And there's no exponent that will work.
And more generally, it's possible to take the log of numbers that are greater than zero, but not for numbers that are less than or equal to zero.
In other words, the domain of the function log base a of x, no matter what base you're using, for a, the domain is going to be all positive numbers.
A few notes on notation.
When you see ln of x, that's called natural log, and it means the log base e of x, where he is that famous number that's about 2.
718.
When you see log of x with no base at all, by convention, that means log base 10 of x, and it's called the common log.
Most scientific calculators have buttons for natural log, and for common log.
Let's practice rewriting expressions with logs in them.
log base three of one nine is negative two can be rewritten as the expression three to the negative two equals 1/9.
Log of 13 is shorthand for log base 10 of 13.
So that can be rewritten as 10 to the 1.
11394 equals 13.
Finally, in this last expression, ln means natural log, or log base e, so I can rewrite this equation as log base e of whenever E equals negative one.
Well, that means the same thing as e to the negative one equals one over e, which is true.
Now let's go the opposite direction.
We'll start with exponential equations and rewrite them as logs.
Remember that log base a of B equals c means the same thing as a to the C equals b, as a to the C equals b, the base stays the same in both expressions.
So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation, that's going to be the same as the base in our log.
Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument of the log.
And what goes on the other side of the equal sign.
Remember that the answer to a log is an exponent.
So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for my exponential equation.
In other words, you and I'll put the 9.
78 as the argument of my log.
This works because log base three of 9.
78 equals u means the same thing as three to the U equals 9.
78, which is just what we started with.
In the second example, the base of my exponential equation is E.
So the base of my log is going to be the answer to my log is an exponent.
In this case, the exponent 3x plus seven.
And the other expression, the four minus y becomes my argument of my log.
Let me check, log base e of four minus y equals 3x plus seven means e to 3x plus seven equals four minus Y, which is just what I started with.
I can also rewrite log base e as natural log.
This video introduced the idea of logs.
And the fact that log base a of B equal c means the same thing as a to the C equals b.
So log base a of B is asking you the question, What power exponent Do you raise a to in order to get b.
In this video, we'll work out the graph, so some log functions and also talk about their domains.
For this first example, let's graph a log function by hand by plotting some points.
The function we're working with is y equals log base two of x, I'll make a chart of x and y values.
Since we're working this out by hand, I want to pick x values for which it's easy to compute log base two of x.
So I'll start out with the x value of one.
Because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is 02 is another x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking, What power do I raise to two to get to one?
And the answer is one.
Power other powers of two are easy to work with.
So for example, log base two of four that saying what power do I raise to to to get four, so the answer is two.
Similarly, log base two of eight is three, and log base two of 16 is four.
Let me also work with some fractional values for X.
If x is one half, then log base two of one half that saying what power do I raise to two to get one half?
Well, that needs a power of negative one.
It's also easy to compute by hand, the log base two of 1/4 and 1/8.
log base two of 1/4 is negative two, since two to the negative two is 1/4.
And similarly, log base two of 1/8 is negative three.
I'll put some tick marks on my x and y axes.
Please pause the video and take a moment to plot these points.
Let's see I have the point, one, zero, that's here to one that's here, for two, that is here.
And then eight, three, which is the base stays the same in both expressions.
So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation, that's going to be the same as the base in our log.
Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument of the log.
And what goes on the other side of the equal sign.
Remember that the answer to a log is an exponent.
So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for my exponential equation.
In other words, you and I'll put the 9.
78 as the argument of my log.
This works because log base three of 9.
78 equals u means the same thing as three to the U equals 9.
78, which is just what we started with.
In the second example, the base of my exponential equation is E.
So the base of my log is going to be the answer to my log is an exponent.
In this case, the exponent 3x plus seven.
And the other expression, the four minus y becomes my argument of my log.
