Transcript for: How To Find The Limit of a Polynomial Function - Calculus
in this lesson we're going to talk about how to find the limit of a polynomial function the simplest fastest way to do this is by direct substitution so let's work on this example now sometimes you may be required to show your work so here's what you can do we're going to break up this polynomial into three parts so this is going to be 4 times the limit as X approaches 2. of the variable x cubed and then minus 5 times the limit as X approaches 2. this is of x squared Plus for limit as X approaches 2 so the constant nine once you break it up like this you can now use direct substitution so the limit as X approaches 2 for X cubed that's just going to be 2 to the third power the limit as X approaches 2 for x squared will simply be 2 squared and the limit as X approaches 2 for the constant nine and that's going to remain nine because there's no X variable associated with the nine so now at this point we just have to do the math 2 to the third power two times two times two is eight two squared is four and so we have this now 4 times 8 is 32. 5 times 4 is 20. and 32 minus 20 is 12. and 12 plus 9. is 21. so that's how you can evaluate the limit of a polynomial function now let's work on another example problem for the sake of practice feel free to pause the video if you want to try this so we're going to have the limit as X approaches 4 of the polynomial function three x squared minus 2x Plus 7. so feel free to take a minute to work on this example problem so we're going to follow the same process this is going to be 3 times the limit as X approaches 4. of x squared minus 2 times the limit as X approaches 4. of x and then Plus the limit as X approaches 4 for the constant seven now let's use direct substitution so this is going to be three times four squared minus 2 times 4. 7 4 times 4 is 16. two times four is eight and three times sixteen is Forty-Eight negative 8 plus 7 is negative 1. 48 minus 1 is 47. so this is going to be the final answer for this problem so that's basically it for this video now you know how to evaluate the limit of a polynomial function and you simply need to use direct substitution now for those of you who want more example problems on evaluating limits this could be limits of rational functions limits of trigonometric functions limits at Infinity feel free to check out the links in the description section below I'm going to be posting more video content relating to this topic