Inverse Trig Functions.
to graph more complicated functions.
This video defines the standard inverse trig functions, sine inverse cosine inverse and tan inverse.
In this crazy looking graph, please focus first on the thin black line.
This is a graph of y equals sine x.
The graph of the inverse of a function can be found by flipping the graph of the original function over the line y equals x.
I've drawn the flipped graph with this blue dotted line.
But you'll notice that the blue dotted line is not the graph of a function because it violates the vertical line test.
So in order to get a function, that's the inverse of y equals sine x, we need to restrict the domain of sine of x.
We'll restrict it to this piece that's drawn with a thick black line.
If I invert that piece, by flipping it over the line y equals x, I get the piece drawn with a red dotted line here.
And that piece does satisfy the vertical line test.
So it is in fact, a function of the regular sine x has domain from negative infinity to infinity are restricted sine x has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two.
It's, its range is still from negative one to one, just like the regular sine x.
Because I've taken the biggest possible piece of the graph, whose flipped version is still a function.
The inverse sine function is often written as arc sine of x.
And since inverting a function reverses the roles of y at x, it reverses the domain and the range.
So arc sine of x, the inverse function has domain from negative one to one, and range from negative pi over two to pi over two, which seems plausible from the graph.
Now an inverse function undoes the work a function.
So if the function sine takes angles theta, two numbers, x, then the inverse sine, or arc sine takes numbers x, two angles theta.
For example, since sine of pi over two is one, arc sine of one is pi over two.
And in general, the output of arc sine of x is the angle between negative pi over two and pi over two whose side is x.
y is equal to arc sine x means that x is equal to sine of y.
But since there are many angles, y who sine is x, right, they all differ by multiples of two pi, we specify also, that y is between negative pi over two and pi over two.
That was the whole point of doing this domain restriction in order to get a well defined inverse value.
There's an alternate notation for inverse sine.
Sometimes it's written as sine to the negative one of x.
But this notation can be confusing, so be careful.
In particular, sign to the negative one of x does not equal one over sine of x.
One over sine of x the reciprocal function is another word for cosecant of x.
But sine to the negative one of x is another word for arc sine of x, the inverse sine function, which is not the same thing as the reciprocal function, let's go through the same process to build an inverse cosine function, we start with a graph of cosine of x, we flip it over the line y equals x to get the blue dotted line.
But the blue dotted line is not a function.
So we go back and restrict the domain for our original cosine of x to just be between zero and pi.
The resulting red graph now satisfies the vertical line test.
So it's a proper inverse function.
Our restricted cosine has domain from zero to pi, and range from negative one to one.
And so our inverse function, arc cosine has domain from negative one to one, and range from zero to pi.
Since cosine takes us from angles to numbers, arc cosine takes us from numbers back to angles.
For example, cosine of pi over four is the square root of two over two.
So arc cosine of the square root of two over two is equal to pi over four.
arc cosine of x is the angle between zero and pi, whose cosine is x.
In other words, y equals r cosine of x means that x is equal to cosine of y.
And y is between zero and pi, since otherwise, there'd be lots of possible answers for an angle y whose cosine is x.
The alternative notation for arc cosine is cosine inverse.
And again, we have to be careful.
cosine to the negative 1x is not the same thing as one over cosine of x.
one over cosine of x is also called secant of x.
cosine to the negative 1x means arc cosine On the inverse function, and these two things are not the same.
Finally, let's look take a look at inverse tangent function.
Here's a graph of tangent, and black.
These vertical lines aren't really part of the function there, just vertical asymptotes.
So in order to get the actual function, when we flip over the line y equals x, we take just one piece of the tangent function.
Here, we've taken the piece marked in black, we flip that over the line y equals x, we get this piece in red, which is actually a function because it satisfies the vertical line test.
Now, you might ask, would it be possible to pick a different piece of the tangent function to invert?
And the answer is, yes, we could do that.
And on another planet, maybe mathematicians do that.
But on our planet, we use the convention that we pick this piece of tangent to invert, which is kind of a convenient choice since it's centered here around the origin.
In the previous two examples, our choice of restricted domain for sine and for cosine was also a convention that led to a conveniently defined inverse function.
In any case, based on our choice, our restricted tan function has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two.
We don't include the endpoints in that interval, because our restricted tan function has vertical asymptotes at negative pi over two and pi over two, so it's not defined there.
The range of our restricted tan function is from negative infinity to infinity.
Therefore, arc tan of X has domain from negative infinity to infinity, and range from negative pi over two to pi over two.
Once again, tangent is taking us from angles to numbers.
So arc tan is taking us from numbers to angles.
For example, tangent of pi over four is one, and therefore, arc tan of one is pi over four.
So arc tan of x means the angle between negative pi over two and pi over two whose tangent is x.
y is equal to arc tan x means that x is equal to tangent of y.
And that y is between negative pi over two and pi over two.
The inverse tan function can also be written as 10 to the minus one of x.
And once again, tan inverse of x means the inverse trig function, arc tan of x.
And it's not equal to one over tan of x, which is called cotangent of x.
And that's all for this video on the three basic inverse trig functions.
sine inverse x, also known as arc sine of x, cosine inverse x, also known as arc cosine x, and tan inverse x, also known as arc tan x.
This video is an introduction to solving trig equations.
Let's start with the equation two cosine x plus one equals zero, I want to find all the solutions in the interval from zero to two pi, and then