Trig Identities.
identities involving trig functions like sine and cosine.
But I want to start with some examples that just involve quadratic functions.
If I want to find the solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus 6x minus seven equals zero, factor it, x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors equal to 0x minus seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero.
And that gives me the solutions, x equals seven, or x equals negative one.
Next, let's look at this more complicated equation.
I'm going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side.
Next, our combined terms on the right hand side.
So that gives me x squared minus 6x.
On both sides, well, x squared minus 6x is equal to x squared minus 6x.
That's true no matter what I plug in for x.
And therefore, all values of x satisfy this equation, we can say that the solution set is all real numbers.
The second equation is called an identity, because it holds for all values of the variable.
The first equation, on the other hand is not an identity, because it only holds for some values of x and not all values.
Please pause the video for a moment and try to decide which of the following three equations or identities that is, which of these equations hold for all values of the variable.
To start out, you might want to test them by plugging in a few values of the variable and see if the equation holds.
The first equation is not an identity.
It does hold for some values of x.
For example, if x equals zero, then sine of two times zero is zero, and two times sine of zero is also zero.
So it does hold when x is zero.
However, when x is say, pi over two, then sine of two times pi over two, that's the same thing as sine of pi, which is zero, but two times sine of pi over two, that's two times one, or two, and zero is not equal to two.
So the equation does not hold for x equals pi over two.
Since it doesn't hold for all values of the variable, it's not an identity.
The second equation is an identity.
You can build some evidence for this by plugging in numbers.
For example, cosine of zero plus pi, which is negative one is the same thing as negative of cosine of zero.
You can also check for example, that cosine of pi over six plus pi is the same thing as negative cosine of pi over six.
But even if we check a zillion examples, that's just evidence, it's not a proof that the identity holds, we could have just gotten lucky with the values we picked, we can build a little bit stronger evidence by looking at graphs, I'm going to put theta on the x axis in a pie graph, y equals cosine of theta plus pi.
That's just like the graph of cosine shifted over to the left by pi.
On the other hand, if I graph y equals negative cosine theta, that's the graph of cosine theta, reflected across the x axis, which gives us the exact same graph.
So graphing both sides gives us strong evidence that this equation is an identity it holds for all values of theta.
Now the strongest evidence of all would be an algebraic proof, which we'll do later in the course, once we have a formula for the cosine of a sum of two angles.
In the meantime, let's look at equation C.
It turns out equation C is an identity.
And we could build evidence for it again by plugging in values for x, or by graphing the left side and the right side separately, and checking to see that the graphs coincided.
But for this example, I'm going to go ahead and do an algebraic verification.
In particular, I'm going to start with the left side of the equation and rewrite things and rewrite things until I get to the right side of the equation.
The first thing I'll rewrite is secant and tangent in terms of their constituent functions, sine and cosine.
Since secant of x is one over cosine x, and tangent of x is sine x over cosine x, I can rewrite this expression as one over cosine x minus sine x times sine x over cosine x.
I can clean up those fractions and write this as one over cosine x minus sine squared x over cosine x.
Now, I noticed that I have two fractions with the same denominator.
So I can pull them together as one minus sine squared x over cosine x.
Next, I'm going to rewrite the numerator one minus sine squared x using the Pythagorean identity that says that cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals one, and therefore, one minus sine squared x is equal to cosine squared x just by subtracting sine squared x from both sides.
So I can replace my numerator, one minus sine squared x with cosine squared x.
And canceling one cosine from the top and from the bottom, that's the same thing as cosine of x, which is the right hand side that I was trying to get to.
So a combination of a bunch of algebra, and the Pythagorean identity allows me to prove that this equation is true for all values of x, it's an identity.
The best way to prove that an equation is an identity is to use algebra, and to use other identities, like the Pythagorean identity, to rewrite one side of the equation, till it looks like the other side.
The best way to prove the net equation is not an identity is to plug in numbers that break the identity.
That is, make the equation not true.
Now, if you're just trying to decide if an equation is an identity or not, and not worried about proving it, then I recommend plugging in numbers, or graphing the left and right sides to see if those graphs are the same.
Recall that an identity is an equation