Law of Cosines - old version.
Recall that solving a right triangle means finding all the lengths of the sides and all the measures of the angles from partial information.
The Law of Cosines is a tool that can help us solve triangles that are not necessarily right triangles.
We call it the Pythagorean theorem says that for a right triangle, like this one, c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared.
I like to think of the law of cosines.
As a generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem, two triangles that are not necessarily right triangles.
loosely speaking, the Law of Cosines says that c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared plus a correction factor where the correction factor depends on the size of the angle that's opposite sides see, in this first triangle, on the left, the angle opposite to side C is a right angle.
So we know that c squared is equal to exactly a squared plus b squared.
But on the next triangle, the angle opposite to side C prime is a little bit less than a right angle.
So this side, C prime should be a little shorter than a squared plus b squared.
All right, C prime squared is equal to a squared plus b squared minus a bit.
In this third triangle, says the angle opposite to side C double prime is a little bit bigger than 90 degrees, this side length should be a little bit bigger than a squared plus b squared.
So I'll write it as a squared plus b squared plus a little bit.
The Law of Cosines says exactly what this little correction factor is.
It says that for any triangle with sides, A, B and C and angle capital C are opposite to side C.
C squared is equal to a squared plus b squared minus two A B, cosine of angle C.
No notice that if the angle C is less than 90 degrees, cosine of C is going to be a positive number.
And so we'll be subtracting a positive quantity, just like we saw in the picture above.
If however, angle C is bigger than 90 degrees, then cosine of c is negative.
So by subtracting to a B, cosine C, we're actually adding a little bit, and we get a longer side as in this picture.
When labeling a triangle, the convention is to use lowercase letters for the side lengths and uppercase letters for the angles, and to put angle A opposite side A, and so on.
When we wrote the law of cosines, on the previous page, we wrote c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two A B, cosine C.
But it doesn't matter which side we call a, which side we call B, and which side the coffee.
All that matters is that this angle is opposite to this side, and between these two sides, so we could have just as easily written a squared equals b squared plus c squared minus two B, C code sine A or B squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B, we can use whichever of these three forms is most convenient for the problem at hand.
Let's use the law of cosines.
To find the side length the angles of this triangle, by convention, I'm going to call the side opposite angle B, side, little B, and the side opposite angle A side, little a.
Since we know two side lengths, and the angle between them, we have all the information on the right side of the law of cosines.
So I'll plug that in.
And use a calculator in degree mode to find that c squared equals 44.
44.
taking the square root, I get that C equals 6.
67.
Next, I'll use the law of cosines.
To find the angle B, I need to use a version of the law of cosines.
That mentions cosine of angle B here, so it'll need to mention side length little B here.
So that'll be the form b squared.
On the left, I'll get a squared plus c squared minus two a C, cosine B.
On the right, I'll plug in values from my side lengths.
And now I can solve for cosine B by subtracting eight squared, and 6.
67 squared from both sides.
And now dividing both sides by negative two times eight times 6.
67.
using a calculator, this gives me that cosine of B is equal to negative point 1172.
The negative value of cosine indicates that my angle B must be greater than 90 degrees, which agrees with a picture.
Next, I can take cosine inverse of both sides to get that b is equal to cosine inverse of negative point 1172, which works out to 96.
73 degrees.
The last thing I have to do is solve for angle A, I could use the Law of Cosines again, and work it out just like I did here for angle B.
But a simpler method is to just use the fact that the sum of the three angles is 180 degrees.
So a must be 180 degrees minus 37 degrees minus 96.
73 degrees.
This works out to 46.
27 degrees.
In the previous example, we were given two sides and the angle between them.
In this angle, were given instead, three side lengths, and we need to find all three angles.
Although there are a lot of computations involved, the ideas are the same as in the previous problem.
To find angle capital C, we need the form of the law of cosines, that has cosine of capital C on the right side, to find capital B, we need to use the form of the Law of Cosines that has cosine of B on the right side, and little B on the left side.
So it'll be b squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two a C cosine B.
At the find angle A, we need a little A squared on the left side.
So that will get cosine of angle A on the right side.
For each of these three equations, I'll plug in the side lengths, solve for the cosine of the angle and use inverse cosine to find my angles.
Notice that my three angles 60 degrees, 87.
79 degrees, and 32 point 20 degrees add up to almost exactly 180 degrees, it's just a tiny bit off due to roundoff error.
In fact, I could have saved myself some work by just finding the measure of angle C, and the measure of angle B, for example, and then subtracting their sum from 180 degrees to get angle A.
In this video, we stated the law of cosines and used it to solve some triangles.
The Law of Cosines can be thought of as the Pythagorean Theorem with an adjustment factor to account for triangles that aren't right triangles.
The Law of Sines is a tool that can be used to solve triangles that are not