Parabolas - Vertex, Focus, Directrix.
of a parabola.
Its vertex, focus and directrix.
I want to start by finding the equation of all points that are equidistant the same distance from a point zero p on the y axis, and the horizontal line y equals negative P.
I'm assuming here that P is positive, for starters, certainly the origin will be among those points as it has a distance of P from the point and P from the line.
But the other points on the x axis will be closer to the line than they are to the point.
So if I want the set of points that are the same distance from the point of the line, that's going to be a curve that curved upwards, something like this.
So for example, a point out here will be the same distance from the point as it is from the line.
So our intuition is suggesting that this set of points should be the shape of a parabola.
Let's confirm this with some algebra.
If we take an arbitrary point, with coordinates x, y, its distance from the point zero P is given by the distance formula, x minus zero squared plus y minus p squared.
Its distance from the line y equals negative P is just given by its difference in Y coordinates.
So that's going to be y minus negative p or y plus P.
Let me set these two quantities equal to each other.
And simplify, I can square both sides to get on the left x minus zero squared with the same thing as x squared plus y minus p squared equals y plus p squared.
Now I'll distribute out, that gives me x squared plus y squared minus two p y plus p squared equals y squared plus two p y plus p squared.
The P squares cancel out as do the Y squared, and I'm left with x squared equals four p y after move In this negative two p y to the other side, I could also write this as y equals one over four p x squared.
And you might recognize this as the standard parabola y equals x squared, transformed by vertically stretched it stretching or shrinking it by this factor of whenever for pee.
You might recall that this lowest point of the parabola is called the vertex.
This point here is called its focus.
And the line here is called the directrix.
Notice that the number of P in this equation represents the distance between the vertex and the focus, and also represents the distance between the vertex and the directrix line.
For this reason, if you're interested in the focus and the vertex, this form of the equation might be more useful than the equivalent form something like y equals A x squared, where the that distance P is more hidden.
Now, so far, we've just considered the case when a p is greater than zero.
Let's look for a moment at what happens when p is less than zero, then when we draw the point zero, P is going to be below the x axis.
And the directrix y equals negative P is going to be above the x axis because we're taking the negative of a negative number makes it a positive y value.
Our parabola will also be upside down.
All the algebra works out the same is just in our equation, this coefficient of y will now be a negative number instead of a positive one.
Or if we write it in this other form, which might be more familiar, our coefficient of x squared will be negative instead of positive, which signifies that the parabola is pointing down.
Since P is now a negative number, if we want to talk about distances, we should write absolute value of p instead of P.
Next, let's turn things sideways by looking at the equation for all points equidistant from a point P zero.
on the x axis.
Here, we're assuming For starters, that P is bigger than zero, and a vertical line at x equals negative P.
Our intuition suggests that this should be a parabola pointing sideways.
And we can work out the same algebra steps to get an equation for it.
Starting with an arbitrary point, x y, the distance from the point P zero is going to be given by x minus p squared plus y minus zero squared, the distance from the line x equals negative P is going to be given by the difference in x coordinates.
So that's going to be x minus negative p, or just x plus P.
I'll set these two distances equal to each other, square both sides like before, and simplify.
This gives me the equation y squared equals four p x, which I could also rewrite as x equals one over four p y squared or x equals A y squared, where my a corresponds to my one over four P.
Once again, if p is negative, then I probably pointing the opposite direction, but my equation will still be the same, it'll just have a negative coefficient of x instead of a positive one.
The negative number of being hidden inside this variable P.
As before, the absolute value of p gives me the distance between the vertex and the focus, and also gives me the distance between the vertex and the directrix.
Now let's find the equation of a parabola with a vertex at some arbitrary point h k instead of the origin, assuming that the parabola opens up or down.
If the parabola had its vertex at the origin, we know it would be given by the equation x squared equals four p y, or I could rewrite that as y equals one over four p x squared.
So this parabola should just be shifted to the right by H and up by K.
From transformations of functions.
We know we can accomplish this by sticking a x minus h on the inside and putting a plus k on the outside.
In other words, we have y minus k equals one over four P times x minus h squared.
Or we can write this as x minus h squared equals four P times y minus k.
So this is the original All with a vertex at the origin, and here is the transformed by shifting right and up to have a vertex at h k, notice that the equations are exactly the same.
It's just you stuck in a minus h and a minus k near the X and near the y, this transform parabola will have its focus, a distance of P up from the vertex.
So that's going to be the point h, k plus p, that's going to have as directrix at a distance p down from the vertex.
So that's going to be the line y equals k minus P.
Everything's the same for this other parabola pointing downwards, we just have P is negative in that case, the same story holds for the parabola is pointing right and left, the original equation, y squared equals four p x gets transformed when we shift the parabola over into y minus k squared equals four p x minus h.
This time, the vertex is a distance p to the left or right of my vertex.
So here it would be h plus p, k.
And the directrix would be shifted over by P also from the vertex.
So this would be the vertical line x equals h minus P.
It works the same way, when the parabola is opening, left instead of right, it's just in this case, P is negative.
Let's use this information to find the equation of a parabola with vertex at two, four, and focus at negative one, four.
I'll start with a quick sketch, which will help me see how the parabola is lined up.
So here's the vertex at two, four.
And the focus is at negative one, four.
So here's the focus here.
Now says the problem always has its focus, that means that this problem must be pointing left and looks something like this.
The directrix is going to be on the other side of the parabola, the same distance as the distance between the vertex and the focus.
Since this distance is a distance of three to minus negative one is three, the directrix must be three units over here to the right, and so that would be the line x equals five.
Since my problems open to the left, I know I need to use the form of the equation y minus k squared equals four p x minus h, where h k is the vertex, so that's two four, I also know that P is going to be negative.
And since the absolute value of p represents the distance between the vertex and the focus, I know that P must be negative three.
So filling on all these numbers, I get y minus four squared equals four times negative three times x minus two.
I'll simplify that to y minus four squared equals negative 12x minus two.
In this video, we looked at special forms of the equation for a parabola, the forms y minus k squared equals four p x minus h, and x minus h squared equals four p y minus k.
In these equations, h k represents the vertex and PS absolute value gives the distance between the vertex and the focus and between the vertex and the directrix.
parabolas in this form, are opening right if p is bigger than zero, and left if p is less than zero, and parabolas in this form, are opening up if p is bigger than zero, and down if p is less than zero.
This video is