Parametric Equations.
video introduces the idea of parametric equations, instead of describing a curve as y equals f of x, we can describe the x coordinates and y coordinates separately in terms of a third variable t, usually thought of as time.
so we can write x as a function of t, and y as a separate function of t.
This is especially useful as a way to describe curves that don't satisfy the vertical line test, and therefore can't be described traditionally as functions of y in terms of x.
A Cartesian equation for a curve is an equation in terms of x and y only.
parametric equations for a curve give both x and y as functions of a third variable, usually T.
The third variable is called the parameter.
That's our first example, let's graph the parametric equations given here on an x y coordinate axis.
Well, we'll do this by finding x and y coordinates that correspond to the same value of t.
For example, when t is negative two, you can calculate that x by plugging in negative two for t gives you five and why, when you plug in negative two for t gives you eight.
Please pause the video for a moment and fill in some additional values of x and y.
For some additional values of t.
Your chart should look like this.
And when we plot the XY pairs and connect the dots, we get something like this.
It says this point over here corresponds to a T value of negative two.
And this point over here corresponds to the t value of two.
So if we think of t as time, we're traversing the curve in this direction.
To find a Cartesian equation for this curve, we need to eliminate the variable t from these equations.
One way to do this is to solve for t and one equation, say the first equation.
So two t is equal to one minus x, which means that t is one half minus x over two, then we can plug that expression for t into the second equation and get y equals one half minus x over two squared plus four, which simplifies to the quadratic equation, y equals 1/4 X squared minus one half x plus 17 fourths.
Let's try some more examples.
A table of values for the first example helps us draw the familiar graph of a circle of radius one.
This should come as no surprise since the equations x equals cosine t and y equals sine t are familiar from trig as a way of describing the x&y coordinates of a point on the unit circle.
Notice that when t equals zero, our curve lies on the positive x axis.
And as t increases from zero to two pi, we traverse the curve once in the counterclockwise direction.
A Cartesian equation for this unit circle is given by the equation x squared plus y squared equals one.
This follows from the trig identity cosine squared t plus sine squared t equals one by substituting in X for cosine t, and y for sine t.
Please pause the video for a moment to graph the second curve and rewrite it as a Cartesian equation.
The table of values should help you see that the graph is again a unit circle.
But this time, as t increases from zero to two pi, we actually traverse the circle twice in the clockwise direction, I'll draw this with a double arrow going clockwise.
The Cartesian equation for this graph is still x squared plus y squared equals one.
And so we found two different parameterizations.
For the same graph on the X Y axis.
Let's take a look at the third equation.
There's no interval value specified for t here.
So let's just assume that t can be any real number.
Now as T ranges from negative infinity to infinity, our Y values, which are given by cosine t, oscillate between one and negative one.
Our x values are always the square of our Y values.
So the graph of this curve has to lie on the graph of x equals y squared, which is a sideways parabola.
But a parametrically defined curve doesn't cover this whole parabola.
Remember that y is given by cosine of t.
So y can only range between negative one and one.
And so we're only getting the portion of the parabola that I shade in here.
As t varies from say, zero to pi, I traverse this parabola one time.
And then as t goes from pi to two pi, I go back again in the other direction.
And as T continues to increase, I traverse this parabola infinitely many times.
The Cartesian equation for this curve is the equation x equals y squared with the restriction that y is between negative one and one.
We've seen several examples where we went from parametric equations to Cartesian equations.
Now let's start with a Cartesian equation and rewrite it as a parametric equation.
In this example, y is already given as a function of x.
So an easy way to parameterize.
This curve is to just let x equal t.
And then y is equal to the square root of t squared minus t, substituting in T for x, the domain restriction in terms of x just translates into a restriction in terms of t.
I call this the copycat parameterization.
Since we've successfully introduced the new variable t, but T just copies, whatever x does.
In the second example, we could try setting x equal to t, then we get 25 t squared plus 36.
Y squared is equal to 900.
and solving for y, we'd have y squared equals 900 minus 25 t squared over 36.
So why is plus or minus the square root of this quantity?
This is a very awkward looking expression.
In fact, why is that even a function of t here because of the plus and minus signs.
So let's look for a better way to parameterize this curve.
Because of the x squared and the y squared, this equation is a good candidate for parameterizing using sine and cosine.
In fact, if we divide both sides of the equation by 900, we get 25x squared over 900 plus 36.
Y squared over 900 is equal to one, which simplifies to x squared over 36 plus y squared over 25 is equal to one.
If I rewrite this as x over six squared plus y or five squared equals one, then I can set x over six equal to cosine of t, and y over five equal to sine of t.
And I can see that for any value of t, x over six and y over five will satisfy this equation, simply because cosine squared plus sine squared equals one.
This gives me the parameterization x equals six cosine of t, y equals five sine of t, which is a handy way to describe any lips.
As a final example, let's describe a general circle of radius r, and center HK.
For any point, x, y on the circle, we know that the distance from that point x y to the center of the circle is equal to r.
So using the distance formula, we know that the square root of x minus h squared plus y minus k squared has to equal our squaring both sides, this gives us the equation for the circle in Cartesian coordinates.
So for example, if our circle has radius five, and has Center at the point, negative 317, then its equation would be x minus negative three, that's x plus three squared plus y minus 17 squared is equal to 25.
One way to find the equation of a general circle in parametric equations, is to start with the unit circle and work our way up.
We know that the unit circle with radius one centered at the origin is given by the equation x equals cosine t, and y equals sine t.
If we want a circle of radius r centered around the origin instead, then we need to expand everything by a factor of R.
So we multiply our x and y coordinates by R.
If we now want the center to be at HK instead of at the origin, then we need to add h to our x coordinates and add K to all our Y coordinates.
This gives us the general equation for a circle in parametric equations.
to match the Cartesian equation above, we can write our same example circle and parametric equations as x equals five cosine t minus three, y equals five sine t plus 17.
In this video, we translated back and forth in between Cartesian equations and parametric equations with a special emphasis on the equations for circles.
This video is