Piecewise Functions.
introduces piecewise functions.
A piecewise function is a function whose defined in pieces by two or more different rules that apply for different x values.
The rule for calculating this function is you calculate negative x squared if x is less than one, but you calculate negative 2x plus three if x is greater than or equal to one.
So if we want to find f of negative two, well, negative two is less than one.
So the first rule applies.
And we compute f of negative two by plugging in negative two for x in the first rule, so that's negative four.
Next, we want to find f of one.
Well, one is right on the border in between the two rules.
But because we have a greater than or equal to here, when x is equal to one, we apply this rule.
And so we could plug one into the formula, negative 2x plus three sets negative two times one plus three, which gives us one as our output.
Finally, if we want to compute f of three, since three is bigger than or equal to one, the second rule applies.
And we plug three into that role.
That gives us an answer of negative three.
To graph F, it makes sense to also draw the graph in pieces.
First, I'm going to draw the graph of minus x squared, just x squared would be a problem opening up, so minus x squared is a parabola opening down goes through the points negative one, negative one and one negative one.
So it looks something like this.
Now I've drawn the whole parabola, but the rule actually only applies when x is less than one.
So I'll keep the part of the parabola when x is less than one.
And I'll erase the part of the parabola when x is greater than or equal to one.
I'll leave an open circle here, when x equals one since that point is not included in this definition, either.
Next, I'm going to draw the second piece, the line y equals minus 2x plus three.
So that's a line with slope negative two, and intercept y intercept three, so it goes through this point 03.
And then it goes over by one and down by two.
So it goes through the point one, one, over by one down by two.
And I can continue and draw this straight line.
Again, we only want part of this graph the part where x is greater than or equal to one.
So I'll erase the part where x is less than one, this part here.
This time, I'm going to leave a closed circle, where x is equal to one, since that point is included on that graph.
When drawing this graph, it's good to think about what happens when x equals one the border point, both in the second role, where we actually include that point.
And in the first rule, where we don't actually include that point, but we kind of have to draw it in order anyway to draw the open circle here.
Now the last question asks us if this function is continuous.
The informal definition of continuity that I'm going to use is that a function is continuous if you can draw the whole thing without picking up your pencil.
And this case, we can't, because we have to pick up our pencil to get from the jump here, up to here.
So this function is not continuous, it's got a discontinuity when x is one, which is exactly the border port between the two rules.
Often piecewise functions will have discontinuities, where they transition from one role to the next.
However, it's possible to have a piecewise defined function that has no discontinuity if the two pieces happen to line up perfectly.
For example, if we've changed the functions definition slightly, I'll call it g of x this time to still be the negative x squared when x is less than one, but this time, negative 2x plus one, if x is bigger than equal to one, then when we graph it, The parabola piece will look the same, but the linear piece will be two units lower than before.
And so it'll actually start right here at one, negative one and go down, and our function will be continuous.
That's all for this introduction to piecewise functions.
The inverse of a function undoes