Transcript for: Product rule | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. I'm now going to introduce
you to a new tool for solving derivatives. Really between this rule, which
is the product rule, and the chain rule and just knowing a
lot of function derivatives, you'll be ready to tackle
almost any derivative problem. Let's start with
the chain rule. Let's say that f of x is equal
to h of x times g of x. This is the product rule. In the chain rule it was f of
x is equal to h of g of x. Right? I don't know if you
remember that. In this case, f of x is equal
to h of x times g of x. If that's the case, then f
prime of x is equal to the derivative of the first
function times a second function plus the first
function times the derivative of the second function. Pretty straightforward. Let's apply it. Let's say that-- I don't like
this brown color, let me pick something more pleasant. Maybe mauve. Let's say that f of x is equal
to 5x to the fifth minus x to the seventh times 20x squared
plus 3x to them mine 7. So one way we could have
done it, we could just multiply this out. This wouldn't be too bad, and
then take the derivative like any polynomial. But let's use this product rule
that I've just shown you. So the product rules that says,
let me take the derivative of the first expression, or h of x
if we wanted to map it into this rule. The derivative of that is
pretty straightforward. 5 times 5 is 25. 25x to the fourth, right? Then minus 7, x to the sixth. We're just going to multiply it
times this second expression, doing nothing different to it. Maybe I'll just do it
in a different color. Times 20x plus 3x minus 7. And then to that we will
add the derivative of this second function. The derivative of that second
function is 40x minus 21x to the minus eighth. And that times this
first function. I guess I'll switch
back to mauve, I think you get the point. 5x to the fifth minus
x to the seventh. All we did here was we said OK,
f of x is made of these two expressions and they are
multiplied by each other. If I want to take the
derivative of it, I take the derivative of the first one and
multiply it by the second one. And then I add that to the
derivative of the second one and multiply it
by the first one. Let's do some more examples
and I think that will hit the point home. Clear image. Change the colors and
I'm back in business. Let me think of a good problem. Let me do another one like
this, and then I'll actually introduce ones and the product
rule and the chain rule. So let's say that f of x is
equal to 10x to the third plus 5x squared minus 7 times
20x to the eighth minus 7. Then we say f prime of x,
what's the derivative of this first expression. It's 30x squared plus 10x. And I just multiply it times
this expression, right? 20x to the eighth minus 7. And I add that to the
derivative of this second expression, this is all on one
line but I ran out of space, 160x to the seventh, right? 8 times 20 is 160. And then the derivative
of 7 is zero. So it's just 160x to
the seventh times this first expression. 10x to the third plus 5x
squared minus seven. There we go. And you could simplify it. You could multiply this out
if you wanted or you could distribute this out if you
wanted, maybe try to condense the terms. But that's really just algebra. So this is using
the product rule. I'm going to do one more
example where I'll show you, I'm going to use the product
and the chain rule and I think this will
optimally confuse you. I want to make sure
I have some space. Here I'm going to use a
slightly different notation. Instead of saying f of x and
then what's f prime of x, I'm going to say y is equal to x
squared plus 2x to the fifth times 3x to the minus three
plus x squared to the minus 7. And I want to find the rate at
which y changes relative to x. So I want to find dy over dx. This is just like, if this
was f of x, it's just like saying f prime of x. This is just a [UNINTELLIGIBLE] notation. So what do I do in
the chain rule? First I want the
derivative of this term. Let me use colors to make
it not too confusing. So what's the derivative
of this term? We are going to use
the chain rule first. So we take the derivative of
the inside which is 2x plus 2 and multiply times
the derivative of the larger expression. But we keep x squared plus 3x
there so it's times 5 times something to the fourth. And that something is
x squared plus 2x. So there we took the derivative
of this first term right here and then the product rules says
we take the derivative of the first term, we just multiply
it by the second term. So the second term is just 3x
to the minus 3 plus x squared and all that to the minus 7. We did that and then to that we
add plus the derivative of this second term times
this first term. We're going to use the
chain rule again. What's the derivative
of the second term? I'll switch back to
the light blue. Light blue means the derivative
of one of the terms. So we take the derivative of
the inside, the derivative of inside is minus 3 times 3 is
minus 9, x go down one to the minus 4, plus 2x. And now we take the derivative
of the whole thing. Times minus 7 times something
to the minus 8, and that something is this inside. 3x to the minus 3
plus x squared. And then we multiply this
thing, this whole thing which is the derivative of the second
term times the first term. Times, and I'm just going to
keep going, times x squared plus 2x to the fifth. So this is a really, I
mean you might want to simplify at this point. You can take this minus
7 and multiply it out and all of that. But I think this
gives you the idea. And if you have to multiply
this out and then do the derivative if it's just a
polynomial, this would take you forever. But using the chain rule,
you're actually able to, even though we ended up with a
pretty complicated answer, we got the right answer. And now we could actually
evaluate the slope of this very complicated function at any
point just by substituting the point into this fairly
complicated expression. But at least we could do it. I think you're going to find
that the chain and the product rules become even more useful
once we start doing derivatives of expressions other
than polynomials. I'm going to teach you about
trigonometric functions and natural log and logarithm
and exponential functions. Actually, I'll probably do that
in the next presentation. So I will see you soon.