Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB Free Response #1 parts b c d | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Now let's do Part b). Find the average velocity of the particle for the time period between time 0 and time 6. So the easy way to think about this, average velocity, is that your average, or one way to think about it, the distance that you travel, sometimes I use "d" for distance or "s" for displacement But your distance in general is equal to your average velocity times time. Or, your average velocity is equal to the distance you travel, divided by time. And so how do we figure out the distance that we travel over that period? Especially because they didn't explicitly give us the position function. Well if you think about it, Let's think about the velocity function over here which they did give us,"v(t)" and I don't know exactly what it looks like, let me just draw a general velocity function right over here So this is our t-axis, and this is our velocity axis right over here and we care about between time 0 and time 6, and let's say our function does something like this, it doesn't really matter, this is just a general drawing over here, How do we figure out the total distance over that time? Well, if you take any small time, right over here,and you multiply it times roughly the constant velocity over that time period, then that will tell you the area of this little column, which will tell you approximately, the distance traveled over this very small interval of time. Because you have time times an approximately constant velocity, which will give you a distance. And so in general if you take the area under this curve, from 0 to 6, that will give you the total distance travelled. So "d" is equal to the definite integral from 0 to 6 of "v(t)" of this thing right over here, "v(t)dt" So if you want the average velocity, you just find the distance, which is this definite integral, and then you divide that by the time, or the elapsed time, in this case, I could actually write times delta t right over here, our change in time right over here, is going to be 6 we start at 0 and we finish at 6, so we just have to evaluate this definite integral, which is not that easy to evaluate analytically, it's lucky for us that they do allow us to use calculators in this part so we'll evaluate it using a calculator And then we just have to divide it by 6 So let's first find out teh distance travelled between time 0 and time 6. And to do that, we can use the TI-85 We'll go to catalog, this tells us all of the different functions they have. And to evaluate definite integrals, we use the