Simplifying using Exponent Rules.
rules.
I'll start by reviewing the exponent rules.
The product rule says that when you multiply two expressions with the same base, you add the exponents.
The quotient rule says that when you divide two expressions with the same base, you subtract the exponents.
The power rule says that when you take a power to a power, you multiply the exponents.
The power of zero rule says that anything to the zero power is one, as long as the base is not zero.
Since zero to the zero is undefined, it doesn't make sense.
negative exponents to evaluate x to the minus n, we take the reciprocal one over x to the n.
To evaluate a fractional exponent, like x to the one over n, we take the nth root of x, we can distribute an exponent over a product, a times b to the n is equal to A to the N times b to the n.
And we can distribute an exponent over a quotient a over b to the n is a to the n over b to the n.
In the rest of this video, we'll use these exponent rules to simplify expressions.
For our first example, we want to simplify three times x to the minus two divided by x to the fourth, there's several possible ways to proceed.
For example, we could use the negative exponent rule dr x to the minus two as one over x squared, all that gets divided by x to the fourth, still, notice that we only take the reciprocal of the x squared, the three stays where it is.
And that's because the exponent of negative two only applies to the x not to the three.
Now if we think of three as three over one, we have a product of two fractions and our numerator.
And so we evaluate that by taking the product of the numerators times the product of the denominators, which is three over x squared, all divided by x to the fourth, I can think of x to the fourth as x to the fourth over one.
So now I have a fraction of a fraction, which I can evaluate by multiplying by the reciprocal, that simplifies to three times one divided by x squared times x to the fourth, which is three over x to the six, using the product rule.
Since x squared times x to the fourth is equal to x to the two plus four, or x to the six.
An alternate way of solving this problem is to start by using the quotient rule, I can rewrite this as three times x to the minus two over x to the fourth, and by the quotient rule, that's three times x to the minus two minus four, or three times x to the minus six.
Now using the negative exponent roll, x to the minus six is one over x to the six.
And this product of fractions simplifies to three over x to the six, the same answer I got before.
The second problem can be solved in similar ways.
Please pause the video and try it before going on.
One way to simplify would be to use the negative exponent rule first, and rewrite y to the minus five as one over wide the fifth.
thinking of this as a fraction, divided by a fraction, I can multiply by the reciprocal and get four y cubed y to the fifth over one by the product rule.
The numerator here is four y to the eight.
And so my final answer is just for one of the eight.
Alternatively, I could decide to use the quotient rule first.
As in the previous problem, I can write this as for y cubed minus negative five by the quotient rule.
And so that's for y to the eighth as before.
I'd like to show you one more method to solve these two problems, kind of a shortcut method before we To go on, that shortcut relies on the principle that a negative exponent in the numerator corresponds to a positive exponent in the denominator.
For example, the x to the negative two in the numerator here, after some manipulations became an X to the positive two in the denominator.
Furthermore, a negative exponent in the denominator is equivalent to a positive exponent in the numerator.
That's what happened when we had the y to the negative five in the denominator, and translated into a y to the positive five in the numerator.
Sometimes people like to talk about this principle, by saying that you can pass a factor across the fraction bar by switching the sine of the exponent that is making a positive exponent negative, or a negative exponent positive.
Let's see how this principle gives us a shortcut for solving these two problems.
In the first problem, 3x to the minus two over x to the four, we can move the negative exponent in the numerator and make it a positive exponent the denominator, so we get three over x to the four plus two or x to the six.
In the second example, for y cubed over y to the minus five, we can change the Y to the minus five in the denominator into a y to the five in the numerator and get our final answer of four y to the three plus five or eight.
We'll use this principle again in the next problems.
In this example, notice that I have I have y's in the numerator and the denominator, and also Z's in the numerator and the denominator.
In order to simplify, I'm going to try to get all my y's either in the numerator or the denominator.
And similarly for the Z's.
Since I have more y's in the denominator, let me move this y to the three downstairs and make it a y to the negative three.
I'm using the principle here that a positive exponent in the numerator corresponds to a negative exponent in the denominator.
Now since I have a positive exponent, z in the numerator and a negative exponent denominator, and I want to get rid of negative exponents, I'm going to pass the Z's to the numerator as e to the minus two in the denominator, it comes as e to the plus two in the numerator.
Notice that my number seven doesn't move.
And when I do any of these manipulations, because it doesn't have an exponent, and the exponent of negative two, for example, only applies to the Z not to the seven.
Now that I've got all my Z's in the numerator and all my y's in the denominator, it's easy to clean this up using the product rule.
And I have my simplified expression.
In this last example, we have a complicated expression raised to a fractional power.
I'm going to start by simplifying the expression inside the parentheses.
I can bring all my y's downstairs and all my x's upstairs and get rid of negative exponents at the same time.
In other words, I can rewrite this as 25x to the fourth, I'll bring the Y to the minus five downstairs and make it y to the fifth on the denominator, bring the x to the minus six upstairs and make it x to the sixth the numerator, and then I still have the Y cubed on the denominator, all that's raised to the three halves power.
Using the product rule, I can rewrite the expression on the inside of the parentheses as 25x to the 10th over y to the eighth.
Recall that we're allowed to distribute an exponent across a product or across a quotient.
When I distribute my three halves power, I get 25 to the three halves times x to the 10th to the three halves divided by y to the eighth to the three halves.
Now the power rule tells me when I have a power to a power, I get to multiply the exponents.
So I can rewrite this as 25 to the three halves times x to the 10 times three halves of our y to the eight times three halves.
In other words, 25 to the three halves times x to the 15th over y to the 12th.
Finally, I need to rewrite 25 to the three halves.
Since three halves can be thought of as three times one half, or as one half times three, I can write 25 to the three halves as 25 to the three times one half, or as 25 to the one half times three.
Well, using the power rule in reverse, I can think of this as 25 cubed to the one half, or as 25 to the one half cubed.
Since when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponents 25 cubed to the one half might be hard to evaluate, since 25 cubed is a huge number, but 25 to the one half is just the square root of 25.
So I have the square root of 25 cubed, or five cubed, which is 125.
Therefore, my original expression is going to be 120 5x to the 15 over y to the 12th.
In this video, we use the exponent rules to simplify complicated expressions.
