Distance Formula.
coordinates, if this first point has coordinates, x one, y one, and the second point has coordinates x two, y two, then the distance between them is given by the formula, the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus y one squared.
This formula actually comes from the Pythagorean Theorem, let me draw a right triangle with these two points as two of its vertices, then the length of this side is the difference between the 2x coordinates.
Similarly, the length of this vertical side is the difference between the two y coordinates.
Now that Pythagoras theorem says that for any right triangle, with sides labeled A and B, and hypotony is labeled C, we have that a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
Well, if we apply that to this triangle here, this hypotony News is the distance between the two points that we're looking for.
So but Tyrion theorem says, the square of this side length, that is x two minus x one squared, plus the square of this side length, which is y two minus y one squared has to equal the square of the hypothesis, that is d squared.
taking the square root of both sides of this equation, we get the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus y one squared is equal to d, we don't have to worry about using plus or minus signs when we take the square root because distance is always positive.
So we've derived our distance formula.
Now let's use it as an example.
Let's find the distance between the two points, negative one five, for negative one, five, maybe over here, and for two, this notation just means that P is the point with coordinates negative one five, and q is the point with coordinates for two.
We have the distance formula, let's think of P being the point with coordinates x one y one, and Q being the point with coordinates x two y two.
But as we'll see, it really doesn't matter which one is which, plugging into our formula, we get d is the square root of n x two minus x one.
So that's four minus negative one squared, and then we add y two minus y one, so that's two minus five squared.
Working out the arithmetic a little bit for minus negative one, that's four plus one or five squared, plus negative three squared.
So that's the square root of 25 plus nine are the square root of 34.
Let's see what would have happened if we'd call this first point, x two y two instead, and a second.
Why'd x one y one, then we would have gotten the same distance formula, but we would have taken negative one minus four and added the difference of y's squared.
So that's why two five minus two squared.
That gives us the square root of negative five squared plus three squared, which works out to the same thing.
In this video, we use the distance formula to find the distance between two points.
When writing down the distance formula, sometimes students forget whether this is a plus or a minus and whether these are pluses or minuses.
One way to remember is to think that the distance formula comes from the Pythagorean Theorem.
That's why there's a plus in here.
And then a minus in here, because we're finding the difference between the coordinates to find the lengths of the sides.
