Exponential Functions.
This video is about exponential functions and their graphs.
an exponential function is a function that can be written in the form f of x equals a times b to the x, where a and b are any real numbers.
As long as a is not zero, and B is positive.
It's important to notice that for an exponential function, the variable x is in the exponent.
This is different from many other functions we've seen, for example, quite a quadratic function like f of x equals 3x squared has the variable in the base, so it's not an exponential function.
For exponential functions, f of x equals a times b dx.
We require that A is not equal to zero, because otherwise, we would have f of x equals zero times b dx.
Which just means that f of x equals zero.
And this is called a constant function, not an exponential function.
Because f of x is always equal to zero in an exponential function, but we require that B is bigger than zero, because otherwise, for example, if b is equal to negative one, say, we'd have f of x equals a times negative one to the x.
Now, this would make sense for a lot of values of x.
But if we try to do something like f of one half, with our Bs, negative one, that would be the same thing as a times the square root of negative one, which is not a real number, we'd get the same problem for other values of b, if the values of b were negative.
And if we tried b equals zero, we'd get a kind of ridiculous thing a times zero to the x, which again is always zero.
So that wouldn't count as an exponential either.
So we can't use any negative basis, and we can't use zero basis, if we want an exponential function.
The number A in the expression f of x equals a times b to the x is called the initial value.
And the number B is called the base.
The phrase initial value comes from the fact that if we plug in x equals zero, we get a times b to the zero, well, anything to the zero is just one.
So this is equal to A.
In other words, f of zero equals a.
So if we think of starting out, when x equals zero, we get the y value of a, that's why it's called the initial value.
Let's start out with this example, where y equals a times b to the x next special function, and we've set a equal to one and B equals a two.
Notice that the y intercept, the value when x is zero, is going to be one.
If I change my a value, my initial value, the y intercept changes, the function is stretched out.
If I make the value of a go to zero, and then negative, then my initial value becomes negative, and my graph flips across the x axis.
Let's go back to an a value of say one, and see what happens when we change B.
Right now, the B value the basis two, if I increase B, my y intercept sticks at one, but my graph becomes steeper and steeper.
If I put B back down close to one, my graph becomes more flat at exactly one, my graph is just a constant.
As B gets into fractional territory, point 8.
7 point six, my graph starts to slope the other way, it's decreasing now instead of increasing, but notice that the y intercept still hasn't changed, I can get it more and more steep as my B gets farther and farther away from one of course, when B goes to negative territory, my graph doesn't make any sense.
So a changes the y intercept, and B changes the steepness of the graph.
So that it's added whether it's increasing for B values bigger than one, and decreasing for values of the less than one.
we'll summarize all these observations on the next slide.
We've seen that for an exponential function, y equals a times b to the x, the parameter or number a gives the y intercept, the parameter B tells us how the graph is increasing or decreasing.
Specifically, if b is greater than one, the graph is increasing.
And if b is less than one, the graph is decreasing.
The closer B is to the number one, the flatter the graph.
So for example, if I were to graph y equals point two five to the x and y equals point four to the x, they would both be decreasing graphs, since the base for both of them is less than one.
But point two five is farther away from one and point four is closer to one.
So point four is going to be flatter.
And point two five is going to be more steep.
So in this picture, This red graph would correspond to point two five to the x, and the blue graph would correspond to point four to the x.
For all these exponential functions, whether the graphs are decreasing or increasing, they all have a horizontal asymptote along the x axis.
In other words, at the line at y equals zero, the domain is always from negative infinity to infinity, and the range is always from zero to infinity, because the range is always positive y values.
Actually, that's true.
If a is greater than zero, if a is less than zero, then our graph flips over the x axis, our domain stays the same, but our range becomes negative infinity to zero.
The most famous exponential function is f of x equals e to the x.
This function is also sometimes written as f of x equals x of x.
The number E is Oilers number as approximately 2.
7.
This function has important applications to calculus and to some compound interest problems.
In this video, we looked at exponential functions, functions of the form a times b to the x, where the variable is in the exponent, we saw that they all have the same general shape, either increasing like this, or decreasing like this, unless a is negative, in which case they flip over the x axis.
They all have a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, the x axis.
In this video, we'll use exponential