Log Functions and Their Graphs.
we'll work out the graph, so some log functions and also talk about their domains.
For this first example, let's graph a log function by hand by plotting some points.
The function we're working with is y equals log base two of x, I'll make a chart of x and y values.
Since we're working this out by hand, I want to pick x values for which it's easy to compute log base two of x.
So I'll start out with the x value of one because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is 02 is another x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking, What power do I raise to two to get to one?
And the answer is one.
Power other powers of two are easy to work with.
So for example, log base two of four that saying what power do I raise to two to get four, so the answer is two.
Similarly, log base two of eight is three and log base two of 16 is four.
Let me also work with some fractional values for X.
If x is one half, then log base two of one half that saying what power do I raise to two to get one half?
Well, that needs a power of negative one.
It's also easy to compute by hand, the log base two of 1/4 and 1/8.
log base two of 1/4 is negative two since two to the negative two is 1/4.
And similarly, log base two of one eight is negative f3 I'll put some tick marks on my x and y axes.
Please pause the video and take a moment to plot these points.
Let's see, I have the point, one zero, that's here to one that's here, for two, that is here, and then eight, three, which is here.
And the fractional x values, one half goes with negative one, and 1/4 with negative two 1/8 with negative three.
And if I connect the dots, I get a graph that looks something like this.
If I had smaller and smaller fractions, I would keep getting more and more negative answers when I took log base two of them, so my graph is getting more and more negative, my y values are getting more and more negative, as x is getting close to zero.
Now I didn't draw any parts of the graph over here with negative X values, I didn't put any negative X values in my chart, that omission is no accident.
Because if you try to take the log base two or base anything of a negative number, like say negative four or something, there's no answer.
This doesn't exist because there's no power that you can raise to to to get a negative number.
So there are no points on the graph for negative X values.
And similarly, there are no points on the graph where x is zero, because you can't take log base two of zero, there's no power you can raise to two to get zero.
I want to observe some key features of this graph.
First of all, the domain is x values greater than zero.
In interval notation, I can write that as a round bracket because I don't want to include zero to infinity, the range is going to be the y values, while they go all the way down into the far reaches of the negative numbers.
And the graph gradually increases y value is getting bigger and bigger.
So the range is actually all real numbers are an interval notation negative infinity to infinity.
Finally, I want to point out that this graph has a vertical asymptote at the y axis, that is at the line x equals zero.
I'll draw that on my graph with a dotted line.
A vertical asymptote is a line that our functions graph gets closer and closer to.
So this is the graph of y equals log base two of x.
But if I wanted to graph say, y equals log base 10 of x, it would look very similar, it would still have a domain of X values greater than zero, a range of all real numbers and a vertical asymptote at the y axis, it will still go through the point one zero, but it would go through the point 10 one instead, because log base 10 of 10 is one, it would look pretty much the same, just a lot flatter over here.
But even though it doesn't look like it with the way I've drawn it, it's still gradually goes up to n towards infinity.
In fact, the graph of y equals log base neaa of X for a bigger than one looks pretty much the same, and has the same three properties.
Now that we know what the basic log graph looks like, we can plot at least rough graphs of other log functions without plotting points.
Here we have the graph of natural log of X plus five.
And again, I'm just going to draw a rough graph.
If I did want to do a more accurate graph, I probably would want to plot some points.
But I know that roughly a log graph, if it was just like y equals ln of x, that would look something like this, and it would go through the point one zero, with a vertical asymptote along the y axis.
Now if I want a graph, ln of x plus five, that just shifts our graph by five units, it'll still have the same vertical asymptote.
Since the vertical line shifted up by five units, there's still a vertical line, but instead of going through one zero, it'll go through the point one, five.
So I'll draw a rough sketch here.
Let's compare our starting function y equals ln x and the transformed version y equals ln x plus five in terms of the domain, the range and the vertical asymptote.
Our original function y equals ln x had a domain of zero to infinity Since adding five on the outside affects the y values, and the domain is the x values, this transformation doesn't change the domain.
So the domain is still from zero to infinity.
Now the range of our original y equals ln x was from negative infinity to infinity.
Shifting up by five does affect the y values, and the range is talking about the y values.
But since the original range was all real numbers, if you add five to all set of all real numbers, you still get the set of all real numbers.
So in this case, the range doesn't change either.
And finally, we already saw that the original vertical asymptote of the y axis x equals zero, when we shift that up by five units, it's still the vertical line x equals zero.
In this next example, we're starting with a log base 10 function.
And since the plus two is on the inside, that means we shift that graph left by two.
So I'll draw our basic log function.
Here's our basic log function.
So I'll think of that as y equals log of x going through the point one, zero, here's its vertical asymptote.
Now I need to shift everything left by two.
So my vertical asymptote shifts left, and now it's at the line x equals negative two, instead of at x equals zero, and my graph, let's see my point, one zero gets shifted to, let's see negative one zero, since I'm subtracting two from the axis, and here's a rough sketch of the resulting graph.
Let's compare the features of the two graphs drawn here.
We're talking about domains, the original had a domain of from zero to infinity.
But now I've shifted that left.
So I've subtracted two from all my x values.
And here's my new domain, which I can also verify just by looking at the picture.
My range was originally from negative infinity to infinity, well, shifting left only affects the x value.
So it doesn't even affect the range.
So my range is still negative infinity to infinity.
My vertical asymptote was originally at x equals zero.
And since I subtract two from all x values, that shifts it to x equals negative two.
In this last problem, I'm not going to worry about drawing this graph.
I'll just use algebra to compute its domain.
So let's think about what's the issue, when you're taking the logs of things?
Well, you can't take the log of a negative number is zero.
So whatever's inside the argument of the log function, whatever is being fed into log had better be greater than zero.
So I'll write that down, we need to minus 3x to be greater than zero.
Now it's a matter of solving an inequality to it's got to be greater than 3x.
So two thirds is greater than x.
In other words, x has to be less than two thirds.
So our domain is all the x values from negative infinity to two thirds, not including two thirds.
It's a good idea to memorize the basic shape of the graph of a log function.
It looks something like this, go through the point one zero, and has a vertical asymptote on the y axis.
Also, if you remember that you can't take the log of a negative number, or zero, then that helps you quickly compute domains for log functions.
Whatever's inside the log function, you set that greater than zero, and solve.
This video is about combining