Log Rules.
log rules are closely related to the exponent rules.
So let's start by reviewing some of the exponent rules.
To keep things simple, we'll write everything down with a base of two.
Even though the exponent rules hold for any base.
We know that if we raise two to the zero power, we get one, we have a product rule for exponents, which says that two to the M times two to the n is equal to two to the m plus n.
In other words, if we multiply two numbers, then we add the exponents.
We also have a quotient rule that says that two to the M divided by n to the n is equal to two to the m minus n.
In words, that says that if we divide two numbers, then we subtract the exponents.
Finally, we have a power rule that says if we take a power to a power, then we multiply the exponents.
Each of these exponent rules can be rewritten as a log rule.
The first rule, two to the zero equals one can be rewritten in terms of logs as log base two of one equals zero.
That's because log base two of one equals zero mean To the zero equals one.
The second rule, the product rule can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying log of x times y equals log of x plus log of y.
I'll make these base two to agree with my base that I'm using for my exponent rules.
In words, that says the log of the product is the sum of the logs.
Since logs really represent exponent, this is saying that when you multiply two numbers together, you add their exponents, which is just what we said for the exponent version.
The quotient rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x divided by y is equal to the log of x minus the log of y.
In words, we can say that the log of the quotient is equal to the difference of the logs.
Since logs are really exponents, another way of saying the same thing is that when you divide two numbers, you subtract their exponents.
That's how we described the exponent rule above.
Finally, the power rule for exponents can be rewritten in terms of logs by saying the log of x to the n is equal to n times log of x.
Sometimes people describe this rule by saying when you take the log of an expression with an exponent, you can bring down the exponent and multiply.
If we think of x as being some power of two, this is really saying when we take a power to a power, we multiply their exponents.
That's exactly how we described the power rule above.
It doesn't really matter if you multiply this exponent on the left side, or on the right side.
But it's more traditional to multiply it on the left side.
I've given these rules with the base of two, but they actually work for any base.
To help you remember them, please take a moment to write out the log roles using a base of a you should get the following chart.
Let's use the log rules to rewrite the following expressions as a sum or difference of logs.
In the first expression, we have a log base 10 of a quotient.
So we can rewrite the log of the quotient as the difference of the logs.
Now we still have the log of a product, I can rewrite the log of a product as the sum of the logs.
So that is log of y plus log of z.
When I put things together, I have to be careful because here I'm subtracting the entire log expression.
So I need to subtract both terms of this song on the make sure I do that by putting them in parentheses.
Now I can simplify a little bit by distributing the negative sign.
And here's my final answer.
In my next expression, I have the log of a product.
So I can rewrite that as the sum of two logs.
I can also use my power rule to bring down the exponent T and multiply it in the front.
That gives me the final expression log of five plus t times log of to one common mistake on this problem is to rewrite this expression as t times log of five times two.
In fact, those two expressions are not equal.
Because the T only applies to the two, not to the whole five times two, we can't just bring it down in front using the power wall.
After all, the power rule only applies to a single expression raised to an exponent, and not to a product like this.
And these next examples, we're going to go the other direction.
Here we're given sums and differences of logs.
And we want to wrap them up into a single log expression.
By look at the first two pieces, that's a difference of logs.
So I know I can rewrite it as the log of a quotient.
Now I have the sum of two logs.
So I can rewrite that as the log of a product.
I'll clean that up a little bit and rewrite it as log base five of a times c over B.
In my second example, I can rewrite the sum of my logs as the log of a product now, I will Like to rewrite this difference of logs as the log of a quotient.
But I can't do it yet, because of that factor of two multiplied in front.
But I can use the power rule backwards to put that two back up in the exponent.
So I'll do that first.
So I will copy down the ln of x plus one times x minus one, and rewrite this second term as ln of x squared minus one squared.
Now I have a straightforward difference of two logs, which I can rewrite as the log of a quotient.
I can actually simplify this some more.
Since x plus one times x minus one is the same thing as x squared minus one.
I can cancel factors to get ln of one over x squared minus one.
In this video, we saw four rules for logs that are related to exponent rules.
First, we saw that the log with any base of one is equal to zero.
Second, we saw the product rule, the log of a product is equal to the sum of the logs.
We saw the quotient rule, the log of a quotient is the difference of the logs.
And we saw the power rule.
When you take a log of an expression with an exponent in it, you can bring down the exponent and multiply it.
It's worth noticing that there's no log rule that helps you split up the log of a psalm.
In particular, the log of a psalm is not equal to the sum of the logs.
If you think about logs and exponent rules going together, this kind of makes sense, because there's also no rule for rewriting the sum of two exponential expressions.
Log rules will be super handy, as we start to solve equations using logs.
Anytime you