Solving Exponential Equations Using Logs.
have an equation like this one that has variables in the exponent logs are the tool of choice for getting those variables down where you can solve for them.
In this video, I'll do a few examples of solving equations with variables in the exponent.
For our first example, let's solve for x the equation five times two to the x plus one equals 17.
As my first step, I'm going to isolate the difficult spot, the part that has the variables and the exponent.
In this example, I can do that by dividing both sides by five.
That gives me two to the x plus one equals 17 over five.
Next, I'm going to take the log of both sides, it's possible to take the log with any base, but I prefer to take the log base 10, or the log base e for the simple reason that my calculator has buttons for those logs.
So in this example, I'll just take the log base 10.
So I can omit the base because it's a base 10 is implied here.
And that gives me this expression.
As my next step, I'm going to use log roles to bring down my exponent and multiply it on the front.
It's important to use parentheses here because the entire x plus one needs to get multiplied by log two.
So that was my third step using the log roles.
Now all my variables are down from the exponent where I can work with them, but I still need to solve for x.
Right now x is trapped in the parentheses.
So I'm going to free it from the parentheses by distributing.
So I get x log two plus log two equals log of 17 fifths.
Now I will try to isolate x by moving all my terms with x's in them to one side, and all my terms without x's in them to the other side.
Finally, I factor out my x.
Well, it's already kind of factored out, and I divide to isolate it.
So I read out what I did.
So far I distributed.
I moved all the x terms on one side, and the terms without x's on the other side.
And then I isolated the x by factoring out and dividing.
We have an exact solution for x.
This is correct, but maybe not so useful if you want a decimal answer.
At this point, you can type in everything into your calculator using parentheses liberally to get a decimal answer about 0.
765.
It's always a good idea to check your work by typing in this decimal answer and seeing if the equation checks out.
This next example is trickier because there are variables in the exponent in two places with two different bases.
First step is normally to clean things up and simplify by isolating the tricky stuff.
But in this example, there's nothing really to clean up or simplifier, or no way to isolate anything more than it already is.
So we'll go ahead to the next step and take the log of both sides.
Again, I'll go ahead and use log base 10.
But we couldn't use log base e instead.
Next, we can use log roles to bring down the exponents.
This gives me 2x minus three in parentheses, log two equals x minus two, log five.
Now I'm going to distribute things out to free the excess from the parentheses.
That gives me 2x log two minus three log two equals x log five minus two log five.
Now I need to group the x terms on one side, and the other terms that don't involve x on the other side.
So I'll keep the 2x log two on the left, put the minus log x log five on the left, and that gives me the minus two log five that stays on the right and a plus three log two on the right.
Finally, I need to isolate x by factoring and dividing by factoring I just mean I factor out the x from all the terms on the left, so that gives me x times the quantity to log two minus log five.
And that equals this mess on the right.
Now I can divide the right side by the quantity on the left side.
When you type this into your calculator, I encourage you to type the whole thing in rather than type bits and pieces in because if you round off, you'll get a less accurate answer than if you type the whole thing in at once.
In this example, when I type it in, I get a final answer of about 5.
106.
In this equation, we have the variable t in the exponent in two places.
The letter E is not a variable, it represents the number e whose decimal approximation is about 2.
7.
Because there's already an E and the expression, it's going to be handy to use natural log in this problem instead of log base 10.
But before we take the log of both sides, let's clean things up.
by isolating the tricky parts, we could at least divide both sides by five.
And that will give us either the negative 0.
05 t is equal to three fifths it is 0.
2 T.
One way to proceed would now be to clean things out further by dividing both sides by either the point two t, but I'm going to take a different approach and go ahead and take the natural log of both sides.
That gives me ln of e to the minus 0.
05 t is equal to ln of three fifths e to the 0.
2 t.
Now on the left side, I can immediately use my log rule to bring down my exponent and get minus 0.
05 t, L and E.
But on the right side, I can't bring down the exponent yet because this e to the point two t is multiplied by three fifths.
So before I can bring down the exponent, I need to split up this product using the product rule.
So I can rewrite this as ln of three fifths plus ln e to the 0.
2 T.
And now I can bring down the exponent.
So that third step was using log roles to ultimately bring down my exponents.
Now ln of E is a really nice expression, ln IV means log base e of E.
So that's asking what power do I raise E to in order to get e?
And the answer is one.
So anytime I have ln of E, I can just replace that with one.
That's why using natural log is a little bit handier here than using log base 10.
You can make that simplification.
Next, I'm ready to solve for t.
So I don't need to distribute here.
But I do need to bring my T terms to one side of my terms without t to the other side.
So let's see.
I'll put my T terms on the left and my team turns without T on the right.
And finally I'm going to isolate t by factoring and dividing.
So by factoring I mean I factor out my T and now I can divide.
Using my calculator, I can get a decimal answer of 2.
04 Three, three.
This video gave some examples of solving equations with variables in the exponent.
And the key idea was to take the log of both sides and use the log properties to bring the exponents down.
This video, give some