Solving Log Equations.
examples of equations with logs in them like this one.
In order to solve the equations like this one, we have to free the variable from the log.
And we'll do that using exponential functions.
My first step in solving pretty much any kind of equation is to simplify it and isolate the tricky part.
In this case, the tricky part is the part with the log in it.
So I can isolate it by first adding three to both sides.
That gives me two ln 2x plus five equals four, and then I can divide both sides by two.
Now that I've isolated the tricky part, I still need to solve for x, but x is trapped inside the log function.
to free it, I need to somehow undo the log function.
Well log functions and exponential functions undo each other.
And since this is a log base e, I need to use the exponential function base e also.
So I'm going to take e to the power of both sides.
In other words, I'll take e to the ln 2x plus five, and that's going to equal e to the power of two.
Now e to the ln of anything, I'll just write a for anything.
That means e to the log base e of a, that you the power and log base e undo each other.
So we just get a, I'm going to use that principle over here, e to the ln of 2x plus five, the E and the log base e undo each other.
And we're left with 2x plus five on the left side.
So 2x plus five is equal to E squared.
And from there, it's easy to finish the problem and solve for x by subtracting five from both sides and then dividing by two.
So I'll just write the third step here is to just say finish solving for x.
There's one last step we need to do when solving equations with logs in them.
And that's to check our answers.
Because we may get extraneous solutions.
an extraneous solution is a solution that comes out of the solving process, but doesn't actually satisfy the original equation.
And those can happen for equations with logs in them, because we might get a solution that makes the argument of the log negative or zero, and we can't take the log of a negative numbers zero.
So let's check and plug in the solution of E squared minus five over two.
We'll plug that in for x in our original equation and see if that works.
So let's see the twos cancel here.
So I get two ln e squared minus five plus five, minus three, I want that to equal one.
And now my fives cancel.
And so I have two ln e squared minus three that I want to equal one.
Well, I think this is going to work out because let's see, ln is log base e.
and log base e of E squared that's asking the question, What power do I raise e two to get e squared?
Well, I have to raise it to the power of two to get e squared.
So this becomes two times two minus three.
And does that equal one, four minus three does equal one.
So that all checks out.
And we didn't have any problem with taking the log of negative numbers zero, we didn't get any extraneous solutions.
So this is our solution.
The second equation is a little bit trickier, because there's a log into places.
Now notice that this is a log where there's no base written.
So a base 10 is implied.
So I'm already thinking in order to undo a log base 10, I'm going to want to take a 10 to the power of both sides.
Of course, it's still a good idea to isolate the tricky part, but there's nothing really to isolate here.
So I'm going to say, can't do it here.
So we'll just jump right to straight step two, and take 10 to the power of both sides.
Okay, so that's going to give me 10 to the whole thing, log x plus three plus log x, that whole thing is in the exponent equals 10 to the One Power.
Well, I know what to do with the right side 10 to the one is just 10.
But what do I do with the 10 to these two things added up Up, while remembering my exponent rules, I know that when you add up the exponent, that's what happens when you multiply two things.
So this is the same thing as 10 to the log x plus three times 10 to the log x, right, because when you multiply two things, you add the exponent, so these are the same.
Okay, now we're in business, because 10 to the log base 10, those undo each other.
And so this whole expression here simplifies to x plus three.
Similarly, 10 to the log base, 10 of x is just x.
So I'm multiplying x plus three by x, that's equal to 10.
Now I have an equation I can deal with, it's a quadratic, so I'm going to first multiply out to make it look more like a quadratic, get everything to one side.
So is equal to zero.
And, and now I can either factor or use the quadratic formula.
I think this one factors, it looks like X plus five times x minus two, so I'm going to get x is negative five, or x is two.
So that was all the third step to finish solving for x.
Finally, we need to check our solutions to make sure we haven't gotten some extraneous ones.
So let's see if x equals negative five.
If I plug that into my original equation, that says, I'm checking that log of negative five plus three, plus log of negative five, checking that's equal to one.
Well, this is giving me a queasy feeling.
And I hope it's giving you a queasy feeling too, because log of negative two does not exist, right, you can't take the log of a negative number.
Same thing with log of negative five.
So x equals negative five is an extraneous solution, it doesn't actually solve our original equation.
Let's check the other solution, x equals two.
So now we're checking to see if log of two plus three plus log of two is equal to one.
Since there's no problem with taking logs of negative numbers, or zero here, this should work out fine.
And just to finish checking, we can see let's see this is log of five plus log of two, we want that equal one.
But using my log rules, the sum of two logs is the log of the product.
So log of five times two, we want that to equal one.
And that's just log base 10 of 10.
And that definitely equals one because log base 10 of 10 says, What power do I raise tend to to get 10.
And that power is one.
So the second solution x equals two does check out.
And that's our final answer.
Before I leave this problem, I do want to mention that some people have an alternative approach.
Some people like to start with the original equation, and then use log roles to combine everything into one log expression.
So since we have the sum of two logs, we know that's the same as the log of a product, right, so we can rewrite the left side as log of x plus three times x, that equals one, then we do the same trick of taking 10 to the power of both sides.
And as before, the 10 to the power and the log base 10 undo each other, and we get x plus three times x equals 10, just like we did before.
In the first solution, we ended up using exponent rules to rewrite things.
In the second alternative method, we use log rules to rewrite things.
So the methods are really pretty similar, pretty equivalent, and they certainly will get us to the same answer.
So we've seen a couple examples of equations with logs in them and how to solve them.
And the key step is to use exponential functions to undo the log.
In other words, take e to the power of both sides to undo natural log, and take 10 to the power of both sides.
To undo log base 10.
