Combining Functions.
This video is about combining functions by adding them subtracting them multiplying and dividing them.
Suppose we have two functions, f of x equals x plus one and g of x equals x squared.
One way to combine them is by adding them together.
This notation, f plus g of x means the function defined by taking f of x and adding it to g of x.
So for our functions, that means we take x plus one and add x squared, I can rearrange that as the function x squared plus x plus one.
So f plus g evaluated on x means x squared plus x plus one.
And if I wanted to evaluate f plus g, on the number two, that would be two squared plus two plus one, or seven.
Similarly, the notation f minus g of x means the function we get by taking f of x and subtracting g of x.
So that would be x plus one minus x squared.
And if I wanted to take f minus g evaluated at one, that would be one plus one minus one squared, or one, the notation F dot g of x, which is sometimes also written just as f g of x.
That means we take f of x times g of x.
In other words, x plus one times x squared, which could be simplified as x cubed plus x squared.
The notation f divided by g of x means I take f of x and divided by g of x.
So that would be x plus one divided by x squared.
In this figure, the blue graph represents h of x.
And the red graph represents the function p of x, we're asked to find h minus p of zero.
We don't have any equations to work with, but that's okay.
We know that for any x, h minus p of x is defined as h of x minus p of x.
So for x equals zero, H minus p of zero is going to be h of zero minus p of zero.
Using the graph, we can find h of zero by finding the value of zero on the x axis, and finding the corresponding y value for the function h of x.
So that's about 1.
8.
Now P of zero, we can find similarly by looking for zero on the x axis, and finding the corresponding y value for the function p of x, and that's a y value of one 1.
8 minus one is 0.
8.
So that's our approximate value for H minus p of zero.
If we want to find P times h of negative three, again, we can rewrite that as P of negative three times h of negative three.
And using the graphs, we see that for an x value of negative three, the y value for P is two.
And the x value of negative three corresponds to a y value of negative two for H.
Two times negative two is negative four.
So that's our value for P times h of negative three.
In this video, we saw how to add two functions, subtract two functions, multiply two functions, and divide two functions in the following way.
When you compose two functions, you apply