Composition of Functions.
the first function, and then you apply the second function to the output of the first function.
For example, the first function might compute population size from time in years.
So its input would be time in years, since a certain date, as output would be number of people in the population.
The second function g, might compute health care costs as a function of population size.
So it will take population size as input, and its output will be healthcare costs.
If you put these functions together, that is compose them, then you'll go all the way from time in years to healthcare costs.
This is your composition, g composed with F.
The composition of two functions, written g with a little circle, f of x is defined as follows.
g composed with f of x is G evaluated on f of x, we can think of it schematically and diagram f x on a number x and produces a number f of x, then g takes that output f of x and produces a new number, g of f of x.
Our composition of functions g composed with F is the function that goes all the way from X to g of f of x.
Let's work out some examples where our functions are defined by tables of values.
If we want to find g composed with F of four, by definition, this means g of f of four.
To evaluate this expression, we always work from the inside out.
So we start with the x value of four, and we find f of four, using the table of values for f of x, when x equals four, f of x is seven, so we can replace F of four with the number seven.
Now we need to evaluate g of seven, seven becomes our new x value in our table of values for G, the x value of seven corresponds to the G of X value of 10.
So g of seven is equal to 10.
We found that g composed with F of four is equal to 10.
If instead we want to find f composed with g of four, well, we can rewrite that as f of g of four Again work from the inside out.
Now we're trying to find g of four.
So four is our x value.
And we use our table of values for G to see that g of four is one.
So we replaced you a four by one.
And now we need to evaluate f of one.
Using our table for F values, f of one is eight.
Notice that when we've computed g of f of four, we got a different answer than when we computed f of g of four.
And in general, g composed with F is not the same thing as f composed with g.
Please pause the video and take a moment to compute the next two examples.
We can replace f composed with F of two by the equivalent expression, f of f of two.
Working from the inside out, we know that f of two is three, and f of three is six.
If we want to find f composed with g of six, rewrite that as f of g of six, using the table for g, g of six is eight.
But F of eight, eight is not on the table as an x value for the for the f function.
And so there is no F of eight, this does not exist, we can say that six is not in the domain, for F composed with g.
Even though it was in the domain of g, we couldn't follow all the way through and get a value for F composed with g of six.
Next, let's turn our attention to the composition of functions that are given by equations.
p of x is x squared plus x and q of x as negative 2x.
We want to find q composed with P of one.
As usual, I can rewrite this as Q of P of one and work from the inside out.
P of one is one squared plus one, so that's two.
So this is the same thing as Q of two.
But Q of two is negative two times two or negative four.
So this evaluates to negative four.
In this next example, we want to find q composed with P of some arbitrary x, or rewrite it as usual as Q of p of x and work from the inside out.
Well, p of x, we know the formula for that.
That's x squared plus x.
So I can replace my P of x with that expression.
Now, I'm stuck with evaluating q on x squared plus x.
Well, Q of anything is negative two times that thing.
So q of x squared plus x is going to be negative two times the quantity x squared plus x, what I've done is I've substituted in the whole expression x squared plus x, where I saw the X in this formula for q of x, it's important to use the parentheses here.
So that will be multiplying negative two by the whole expression and not just by the first piece, I can simplify this a bit as negative 2x squared minus 2x.
And that's my expression for Q composed with p of x.
Notice that if I wanted to compute q composed with P of one, which I already did in the first problem, I could just use this expression now, negative two times one squared minus two and I get negative four, just like I did before.
Let's try another one.
Let's try p composed with q of x.
First I read write this P of q of x.
Working from the inside out, I can replace q of x with negative 2x.
So I need to compute P of negative 2x.
Here's my formula for P.
to compute P of this expression, I need to plug in this expression everywhere I see an x in the formula for P.
So that means negative 2x squared plus negative 2x.
Again, being careful to use parentheses to make sure I plug in the entire expression in forex.
let me simplify.
This is 4x squared minus 2x.
Notice that I got different expressions for Q of p of x, and for P of q of x.
Once again, we see that q composed with P is not necessarily equal to P composed with Q.
Please pause the video and try this last example yourself.
rewriting.
And working from the inside out, we're going to replace p of x with its expression x squared plus x.
And then we need to evaluate p on x squared plus x.
That means we plug in x squared plus x, everywhere we see an x in this formula, so that's x squared plus x quantity squared plus x squared plus x.
Once again, I can simplify by distributing out, that gives me x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus x squared plus x squared plus x, or x to the fourth plus 2x cubed plus 2x squared plus x.
In this last set of examples, we're asked to go backwards, we're given a formula for a function of h of x.
But we're supposed to rewrite h of x as a composition of two functions, F and G.
Let's think for a minute, which of these two functions gets applied first, f composed with g of x, let's see, that means f of g of x.
And since we evaluate these expressions from the inside out, we must be applying g first, and then F.
In order to figure out what what f and g could be, I like to draw a box around some thing inside my expression for H, so I'm going to draw a box around x squared plus seven, then whatever's inside the box, that'll be my function, g of x, the first function that gets applied, whatever happens to the box, in this case, taking the square root sign, that becomes my outside function, my second function f.
So here, we're gonna say g of x is equal to x squared plus seven, and f of x is equal to the square root of x, let's just check and make sure that this works.
So I need to check that when I take the composition, f composed with g, I need to get the same thing as my original h.
So let's see, if I do f composed with g of x, well, by definition, that's f of g of x, working from the inside out, I can replace g of x with its formula x squared plus seven.
So I need to evaluate f of x squared plus seven.
That means I plug in x squared plus seven, into the formula for for F.
So that becomes the square root of x squared plus seven to the it works because it matches my original equation.
So we found a correct answer a correct way of breaking h down as a composition of two functions.
But I do want to point out, this is not the only correct answer.
I'll write down my formula for H of X again, and this time, I'll put the box in a different place, I'll just box the x squared.
If I did that, then my inside function of my first function, g of x would be x squared.
And my second function is what happens to the box.
So my f of x is what happens to the box, and the box gets added seven to it, and taking the square root.
So in other words, f of x is going to be the square root of x plus seven.
Again, I can check that this works.
If I do f composed with g of x, that's f of g of x.
So now g of x is x squared.
So I'm taking f of x squared.
When I plug in x squared for x, I do in fact, get the square root of x squared plus seven.
So this is that alternative, correct solution.
In this video, we learn to evaluate the composition of functions.
by rewriting it and working from the inside out.
We also learn to break apart a complicated function into a composition of two functions by boxing one piece of the function and letting the first function applied in the composition.
Let that be the inside of the box, and the second function applied in the composition be whatever happens to the box.
