Solving Quadratic Equations.
This video is about solving quadratic equations.
a quadratic equation is an equation that contains the square of the variable, say x squared, but no higher powers of x.
The standard form for a quadratic equation is the form a x squared plus b x plus c equals zero, where A, B and C represent real numbers.
And a is not zero so that we actually have an x squared term.
Let me give you an example.
3x squared plus 7x minus two equals zero is a quadratic equation in standard form, here a is three, B is seven, and C is minus two.
The equation 3x squared equals minus 7x plus two is also a quadratic equation, it's just not in standard form.
The key steps to solving quadratic equations are usually to write the equation in standard form, and then either factor it or use the quadratic formula, which I'll show you later in this video.
Let's start with the example y squared equals 18 minus seven y.
Here our variable is y, and we need to rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form, we can do this by subtracting 18 from both sides and adding seven y to both sides.
That gives us the equation y squared minus 18 plus seven y equals zero.
And I can rearrange a little bit to get y squared plus seven y minus 18 equals zero.
Now I've got my equation in standard form.
Next, I'm going to try to factor it.
So I need to look for two numbers that multiply to negative 18 and add to seven.
two numbers that work are nine and negative two, so I can factor my expression on the left as y plus nine times y minus two equals zero.
Now, anytime you have two quantities that multiply together to give you zero, either the first quantity has to be zero, or the second quantity has to be zero, or I suppose they both could be zero.
In some situations, this is really handy, because that means that I know that either y plus nine equals zero, or y minus two equals zero.
So I can as my next step, set my factors equal to zero.
So y plus nine equals zero, or y minus two equals zero, which means that y equals negative nine, or y equals two.
It's not a bad idea to check that those answers actually work by plugging them into the original equation, negative nine squared, does that equal 18 minus seven times negative nine, and you can work out that it does.
And similarly, two squared equals 18 minus seven times two.
In the next example, let's find solutions of the equation w squared equals 121.
This is a quadratic equation, because it's got a square of my variable W, I can rewrite it in standard form by subtracting 121 from both sides.
Notice that A is equal to one b is equal to zero because there's no w term, and c is equal to negative 121 in the standard form, a W squared plus BW plus c equals zero.
Next step, I'm going to try to factor this expression.
So since 121, is 11 squared, this is a difference of two squares, and it factors as w plus 11, times w minus 11 is equal to zero.
If I set the factors equal to zero, I get w plus 11 equals zero or w minus 11 equals zero.
So w equals minus 11, or w equals 11.
In this example, I could have solved the equation more simply, I could have instead said that if W squared is 121, and then w has to equal plus or minus the square root of 121.
In other words, W is plus or minus 11.
If you saw the equation this way, it's important to remember the plus or minus since minus 11 squared equals 121, just like 11 squared does.
Now let's find the solutions for the equation.
x times x plus two equals seven.
Some people might be tempted to say that, oh, if two numbers multiply to equal seven, then one of them better equal one and the other equals seven or maybe negative one and negative seven.
But that's faulty reasoning in this case, because x and x plus two don't have to be whole numbers.
They could be crazy.
fractions or even irrational numbers.
So instead, let's rewrite this equation in standard form.
To do that, I'm first going to multiply out.
So x times x is x squared x times two is 2x.
That equals seven, and I'll subtract the seven from both sides to get x squared plus 2x minus seven is zero.
Now I'm looking to factor it.
So I need two numbers that multiply to negative seven and add to two, since the only way to factor negative seven is as negative one times seven or seven times negative one, it's easy to see that there are no whole numbers that will do will work.
So there's no way to factor this expression over the integers.
Instead, let's use the quadratic equation.
So we have our leading coefficient of x squared is one.
So A is one, B is two, and C is minus seven.
And we're going to plug that into the equation quadratic equation, which goes x equals negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four, I see all over two different people have different ways of remembering this formula, I'd like to remember it by seeing it x equals negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four, I see oh over to a, but you can use any pneumonic you like.
Anyway, plugging in here, we have x equals negative two plus or minus the square root of two squared minus four times one times negative seven support and remember the negative seven there to all over two times one.
Now two squared is four, and four times one times negative seven is negative 28.
So this whole quantity under the square root sign becomes four minus negative 28, or 32.
So I can rewrite this as x equals negative two plus or minus the square root of 32, all over two.
Since 32, is 16 times two and 16 is a perfect square, I can rewrite this as negative two plus or minus the square root of 16 times the square root of two over two, which is negative two plus or minus four times the square root of two over two.
Next, I'm going to split out my fraction as negative two over two plus or minus four square root of two over two, and then simplify those fractions.
This becomes negative one plus or minus two square root of two.
So my answers are negative one plus two square root of two and negative one minus two square root of two.
And if I need a decimal answer for any reason, I could work this out on my calculator.
As our final example, let's find all real solutions for the equation, one half y squared equals 1/3 y minus two.
I'll start as usual by putting it in standard form.
So that gives me one half y squared minus 1/3 y plus two equals zero, I could go ahead and start trying to factor or use the quadratic formula right now.
But I find fractional coefficients kind of annoying.
So I'd like to get rid of them.
By doing what I call clearing the denominator, that means I'm going to multiply the whole entire equation by the least common denominator.
In this case, the least common denominator is two times three or six.
So I'll multiply the whole equation by six have to make sure I multiplied both sides of the equation, but in this case, six times zero is just zero.
And when I distribute the six, I get three y squared minus two y plus 12 equals zero.
Now, I could try to factor this, but I think it's easier probably just to plunge in and use the quadratic formula.
So I get x equals negative B, that's negative negative two or two, plus or minus the square root of b squared, minus four times a times c, all over to a.
Working out the stuff in a square root sign, negative two squared is four.
And here we have, let's see 144.
So this simplifies to x equals to plus or minus the square root of four minus 144.
That's negative 140.
All of our sex.
Well, if you're concerned about that negative number under the square root sign, you should be we can't take the square root of a negative number and get an N get a real number is our answer.
There's no real number whose square is a negative number.
And therefore, our conclusion is we have no real solutions to this quadratic equation.
In this video, we solve some quadratic equations by first writing them in standard form and then Either factoring or using the quadratic formula.
In some examples, factoring doesn't work, it's not possible to factor the equation.
But in fact, using the quadratic formula will always work even if it's also possible to solve it by factoring.
So you can't really lose by using the quadratic formula.
It's just sometimes it'll be faster to factor instead.
