Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 2) So where we left off in the last video, we kept trying to approximate this purple f of x with a polynomial.
And we at first said we'll just make the polynomial a constant and set it it's just going to intersect f of 0 at x = 0.
So that's a first you can kind of all think of it as a 0 of order approximation of the function.
Then we said, oh, what if not only do they intersect at x = 0, but let's say that their slope is the same as x = 0, and that's that approximation? And that's about as good as you're going to do with a line, especially as you get close to 0.
And we said, OK, that's good, but what if their second derivative is the same? And that's where we ended up with we added this term here.
And I hinted that we'll just keep doing this process.
And so you could imagine, if I want the third derivative to be the same, I could add another term right here, plus, where I know what the value of f of x's third derivative is at 0.
So I'll write that as f to the third derivative at 0 times x to the third.
Now what do you think is going to be down here? What's going to be he denominator? You might be tempted to say that we'll put a 3 down here.
But it turns out you're going to put a 3 times a 2, which is a 6, or 3 factorial.
Now why is that? Let me just take a little departure here and I think you'll start to understand why you put a 6 down here.
Why this isn't a 3 and you put a 6.
Here you put a 2, but 2 is also 2 factorial, right? 2 factorial is 2 times 1, right? Hopefully you remember what factorial actually, let me tell you what factorial is just in case.
10 factorial = 10 times 9 times 8 times 7, dah, dah, dah, dah, times 2 times 1.
So you're multiplying all of the numbers up to that number.
4 factorial and the numbers get big very, very fast is 4 times 3 times 2 times 1.
2 factorial = 2 times 1.
1 factorial = 1.
Now this is kind of a weird definition.
It comes out of combinatorics.
Actually it works for what we're doing is, well, 0 factorial is also = 1.
I know that might be a little un-intuitive.
This is just a definition.
It's like saying that i squared = negative 1.
It is a definition that it makes formulas be more general, I guess is a simple way to put it.
But let me erase all of this because that was just a divergence just because I realized I was going to use factorial, so you should know what a factorial is.
But I think that's a fairly straightforward concept.
So going back to what we were doing.
I was asking you why do I put a 6 down here instead of a 3, like we put a 2 here? Well, let's just take this term alone and take its third derivative.
So if I have the term and it's f, the third derivative at 0, x to the third over and let me just write 6 as 3 times 2 or 2 times 3.
That'll make it a little more clear.
What's the first derivative here? What happens when I take the derivative once? Well, I'm going to multiply the whole thing by the 6 exponent and decrement the exponent, right? So I'm going to multiply the whole thing times 3 times f, the third derivative, x squared over 2 times 3.
So that first time I did it, this 3 and this 3 cancel out, right? That red's looking a little bit too demonic.
Let me pick another color.
And then when I take the second derivative what am I going to get? Well, the 3's gone, now I just have a 2 in the denominator, so I multiply the whole thing by 2 times f prime prime prime of 0 times, and I decrement the exponent, x to the 1 over 2.
Well, now the 2's cancel out, right? So the reason why you're putting a factorial there is every time you take a derivative you're decrementing the exponent 1, and multiplying the whole expression by the exponent.
So if you're going to take n derivative, you're essentially going to be multiplying this expression times n factorial.
So you don't want an n factorial out here.
You put an n factorial at the bottom.
Hopefully that makes sense.
Play around with it yourself and it should start to make a little bit more sense.
So in general, if we just kept doing this process forever, what would the function look like? The reason why I'm covering this is because going this way we're going to be able to prove what I think is the most mind-bending concept in mathematics.
And it will make you love mathematics, hopefully.
Some people actually well, I won't go into the spiritual aspects of it.
So what would be this, if I just kept saying that I'm just going to keep taking derivatives and adding them to this term, this polynomial? Well, the polynomial would become p of x = f of 0 plus f prime of 0 x.
And let's just divide it by 1 factorial, just to make it clear that that's a 1 factorial, right? And that's an x to the 1, right? That's just this term, but I just wrote it a little differently.
This term right here, this is f of 0 times x to the 0.
I know that's really messy, but hopefully you see what I'm saying.
And that's over 0 factorial, right? 0 factorial is 1, x to the 0 is 1, so it's just f of 0.
And then plus the second derivative at 0 times x squared over 2 factorial plus and we just keep adding.
The third derivative at x = 0 of x to the third over 3 factorial, and we just keep going on.
So we could do this to infinity.
And actually we will do it, and this is called the Maclaurin Series.
So if we just wanted to approximate this as hard as we can, essentially take the infinite derivatives of it, we get the Maclaurin Series.
So we are going to define this polynomial p of x.
It's going to be the infinite series, the infinite sum.
Let's start with n = 0, and we're going to go to infinity.
What is each term? It's going to be f of well it's going to be f, the nth derivative of f evaluated at 0 times x to the n over n factorial.
This is the Maclaurin Series.
We're later learn that the Maclaurin Series is a specific example of the Taylor Series, which is a specific example of a power series.
But anyway, this might seem very complicated to you.
I have all the sigma notation.
Just remember, this is essentially just that and I just keep going to infinity.
And if you play around with it it should make sense.
But I think this will become a lot more concrete when I do this with a specific f of x.
This is where it gets cool.
In case you don't think it's already cool.
So let's pick f of x to be, to me, the most amazing function of them all.
If I ever built a shrine or a church or something or skyscraper, I would somehow make this function show up all over the place, and then years from now people would be awed by the mysticism of it all.
But anyway, let's try to approximate e to the x with a Maclaurin Series.
You know that sigma thing, that's hard to memorize.
Just remember you want all the derivatives to be the same.
So let's make the approximation of this.
Actually, I won't prove it.
It's out of the scope of what we're doing right now.
But the approximation, even when it's centered at 0, actually = the function when you take the infinite sum.
But let's just see what it looks like.
Because this is pretty cool.
Before we start building the polynomial, let's just figure out a couple of things.
So what is f prime of x? That's also e to the x, right? What's f prime prime of x? Well that also = e to the x.
We have learned and actually recently did a proof that the derivative of e to the x is e to the x.
But that also needs a second derivative and the third and the fourth and the nth derivative of e to the x = e to the x.
I could take an arbitrary number of derivatives of e to the x and it = e to the x, which is amazing.
The rate of change of the function at any point = the function.
The rate of change of the rate of change of the function at any point = the function.
I mean that's I want to just go some place and ponder it, but I'm too busy making videos.
But anyway, back to what we were doing.
So what is f of 0? f of 0 = e to the 0, which = 1, right? Well that's also going to be f prime of 0.
That's also e to the 0, which = 1.
So all of the derivatives, the nth derivative at 0 is going to = 1 for this specific case of f of x, for e to the x.
And this is why this is so cool.
But actually, it actually gets even more amazing.
So, you hopefully realize that f of 0 and all of its derivatives at 0 are = 1.
So now we can do the powers of the Maclaurin Series in the next video.
See you soon.
