Transcript for: Divergence 3 | Multivariable Calculus | 
Now let's do a slightly fancier example, then we'll try to analyze the vector field.
And hopefully this will make everything a little bit more tangible.
So let's say that the velocity of the fluid, or the particles in the fluid, at any given point in the x-y plane, let's say in the x-direction, it is x squared, x squared minus 3x plus 2 in the x-direction, plus y squared minus 3y plus 2 in the y-direction.
Make it simple so that we only have one thing to factor.
So let's just do the math first.
Let's figure out the divergence of our vector field, the divergence of our field.
And going to show you a graph of this field soon, so we'll get an intuition of what it actually looks like, instead of my not-so-accurate drawings.
So what's the divergence? We take the partial derivative of the x-component with respect to x.
So that's just, there's only an x-variable here, so we don't really have to worry about keeping y or z constant.
It's really just a derivative of this expression with respect to x.
So it's 2x minus 3.
And then we add that to the partial derivative of the y-component, or the y-function, with respect to y.
There's only y's in the y-component, so we just take the derivative with respect to y.
So it's plus 2y minus 3.
Or we could just say that the divergence of v, at any point xy, so this is a function of x and y, is 2x plus 2y minus 3.
Now before I show you the graph, let's analyze this function a little bit.
First of all, let's just look at the original vector field, and think about when does that vector field have some interesting points? Well, I think some interesting points are when either the x- or the y-components are = 0.
So when is the x-component = 0? Well, if we factor the x-component, that's the same thing as, we could rewrite our vector field.
If we just factored that, that's x minus 1 times x minus 2i plus, and it's the same polynomial, just with y, for the y-component, so y minus 1 times y minus 2 times j.
So the x-component is 0 when x = 1, these are just the roots of this polynomial, when x = 1 or 2, right? And the y-component is 0 when y = 1 or 2.
And they're both = 0 if we have any combination of these points.
So the points where they're both = 0 are 1, 1, x's is 1, y is 2, right, because then both components are 0, 2, 1, or 2, 2.
So these are the points where the magnitude of the velocity of our fluid, or the particles of the fluid, are 0.
And we'll see that on our graph in a second.
And let me ask another question.
At what points are, well, let's first decide, what point is the divergence = 0? Let's say, at what point is a divergence = 0.
Let me click clear up some space.
I think I can delete this.
We got our points, we figured out what coordinates are the magnitude of the vector field 0.
So let's try to figure out, when is the divergence = 0? So this is divergence.
So if we set that = 0, 2x plus 2y, 2x plus 2y, oh, sorry.
You know what, this is 2x minus 3 plus 2y minus 3.
So this is minus 6, right? Minus 3 minus 3, that's minus 6.
That's my major flaw, adding and subtracting.
Anyway, so the divergence.
2x plus 2y, minus 6.
And we want to know, when does that = 0? So let's set it = 0.
And we can simplify this a little bit.
We can divide both sides of the equation by 2, and you get x plus y minus 3 = 0.
You get x plus y = 3.
We could be finished there, or we could just put it in our traditional mx plus b form, that's the way I find it easier to visualize a line.
We could say y = 3 minus x.
So along this line, the divergence of the vector fields b = 0, along the line y = 3 minus x.
And if we're above that line, the divergence is going to be positive, right, because if you just made this a greater than sign, that would carry over.
You'd have y is greater than 3-x.
So y greater than 3-x, the divergence is positive.
And y is less than 3 minus x, the divergence is negative.
And you could just make this a less than sign then solve, and you'll get y is less than 3-x, you want to know when the divergence is negative.
So I think we've done all of the analyzing we can do.
So let's take a look at the graph and see if it if it's consistent with our intuition of what a divergence is, and the numbers we found.
I hope you can see this.
So this is the vector field.
I don't have space to show it, but I think you remember, this is, you know, x squared minus 3x plus 2.
This is the definition of our vector field.
Have it graphed here.
And we figured out, we just figured out when the x-components and the y-components are = 0, and then we said, when are both of them = 0? And we said, oh, well at the point 1, 1.
Well, this is the point 1, 1, and we that the magnitudes of the vectors are 0 at that point.
And actually, I could zoom in a little bit.
Right around here, they're all pointing inwards, , but they get smaller and smaller as you approach the point 1, 1, right? We also said at the point 1, 2.
x is 1, y is 2.
And here, too, we see that the magnitude of the vectors get very, very, very small.
We could zoom in again.
And we see, the magnitude gets very small.
The other point, 2, 1, once again, we see the magnitude get small, and then 2, 2.
So that's consistent with what we found out, that the vector field gets very small at this point.
And the other interesting thing we said, OK, when does the divergence = 0? Well, the divergence equaled 0 along the line y = 3 minus x.
So the line y = 3 minus x starts, the y-intercept is going to be 3, and it's going to come down like this.
Right? So anything along, at any point along that line, the divergence is 0.
And if we actually look at the graph, it makes sense.
Because I can't draw on this graph, but if we drew a circle right there, let's assume that that's on that, the line y = 3 minus x, we would see that in a given amount of time, just as many particles are entering through the top right as leaving through the bottom left, right? A lot of entering through the top right and a lot of leaving through the bottom left.
And the vectors, though, are about the same.
And if we go to the bottom, if we go here on the line, it looks like maybe there are less entering, but there's also less leaving.
I know it's hard to see, but anywhere along the line, you see just as much entering as leaving.
And that's why the divergence is 0.
Now, let's look at some of the other points.
Up here, we figure the diverge is positive.
And does that make [UNINTELLIGIBLE] an arbitrary point.
If we were to draw a circle around here, we see the vectors on the left-hand side of that circle that you can't see, because I can't draw on this graph.
But actually, let's just say the square.
Let's say the square is my region, right? This one right here.
If that square is my region, we see the vectors on the left-hand side are larger, than factors leaving are larger than the vectors entering it, right? So if, in a given amount of time, more is leaving than entering, then I'm becoming less dense, or you could say that the particles are diverging.
And that makes sense, because I have a positive divergence.
And if we go here, where the divergence is negative, let's pick an arbitrary spot.
Let's say this square right here.
We see that the vectors entering it, the magnitude of the vectors entering it, are larger than the magnitude of the vectors exiting it.
So in any given amount of time, more is coming in than leaving.
So it's getting denser, or it's converging.
So negative divergence, you can view it as getting denser, or it's actually converging.
Actually, something interesting is happening at these two points.
So we said that at the point 2, 1, we see that in the y-direction it's actually converging, right? Above y = 1, the arrows are pointing down, and below it the arrows are pointing up, right? So in the y-direction, we're actually converging, or we have a negative divergence.
Things are entering any given spot.
But in the x-direction, things are getting pushed out, right? So the reason why the divergence is 0 here, you might have particles entering above and below a certain space, but you have just as many particles exiting to the left and the right.
So it's kind of like particles are getting deflected out.
So on a net basis, between both dimensions, you have no increase or decrease in density along that line y = 3 minus x.
And before I run out of time, I just want to give you that core intuition again, of why the divergence is positive, and why that means that things are flowing out, when the rate of change is positive.
So we said the divergence is positive.
Let's say at the spot, right? So it makes sense, if our partial derivatives are positive, that means that the magnitude of our vector is getting larger and larger for larger values of our x's and y's, right? So if the magnitude of our vectors are getting larger and larger for larger values of x and y, the vectors on the right are going to have a larger magnitude than the factors on the left.
They're increasing in magnitude.
And so if I were to draw a boundary, more is going to be coming out of the right than entering to the left.
And so you have a positive diverge, or you're getting less dense.
Anyway, I hope I haven't confused you too much, but I have run out of time once again.
I'll see you in the next video.
