Transcript for: Derivatives (part 9) Now that you've been introduced into some of the other functions that we can take a derivative of, we can now apply them using the chain and the product rule.
So let's do some fun derivatives.
And I think derivatives is all about exposure, it's all about practice.
So I just encourage you to do as much practice as possible.
And it's actually in some ways a pretty mechanical thing to do and it's easier than a lot of the math that you've learned before.
Just maybe initially looks a little abstract.
So let's say that f of x is equal to let's say the sin of 3x to the fifth plus 2x.
So what is f prime of x? What is the derivative of this function? Well, we use the chain rule again.
We take the derivative of the inside.
So what's the derivative of the inside? Well, that's just 5 times 3 is 15 x to the fourth plus 2.
And then we take the derivative of the larger function.
In the last presentation we learned the derivative of sin is what? It's cosine.
So it's times the cosine of this expression right here.
3x to the fifth plus 2x.
Pretty painless, no? Let's mix it up even more.
Let's say that let me switch colors just to not be monotonous.
I'll pick powder blue.
Very nice.
Let's say that y and I'm going to switch notation on purpose that you get used to the various notations you can use.
Let's say that y is equal to let me think of something good e to the x times cosine to the fifth of x.
That looks daunting to me.
Let's see if we can break it down using the product and the chain rules.
We want to figure out dy/dx.
We want to figure out the rate at which y changes relative to x.
Or the derivative.
Find the derivative of both sides.
Well, let's use the product rule.
Well, we're going to have to use the chain and the product rules.
So first we take the derivative of this first term, and once again we learned in the last presentation the most amazing fact, one of the most amazing facts in the universe that the derivative of either the x is what? It is e to the x.
Blows my mind.
e to the x.
Once again I've taken the derivative, and it's the same expression.
Amazing.
And then I multiply it times a second expression.
Cosine to the fifth of x.
And now to that I add the derivative of the second expression.
Now this will be a little bit more interesting.
So this is cosine of x to the fifth.
This is just another way of writing cosine of x to the fifth power.
And I think that'll make it a little bit more clear, that this cosine superscript 5, this is really just cosine to the fifth x.
This means cosine of x to the fifth.
So now the derivative is a little bit clearer.
We can use the chain rule and once again, we're just working on this right half.
We take the derivative of the inside.
What's the derivative of cosine of x? Yep you're right.
Well, I don't know, I didn't hear you so I don't know.
I'll assume you're right.
The derivative of cosine of x is minus sin of x, and that's something you should memorize, although you should prove it to yourself as well.
So we take the derivative of the inside minus sin.
Derivative of cosine of x is minus sin of x, and then we take the derivative of the outside.
We're just doing the chain rule.
So it's 5 cosine to the fourth of x.
So there we took the derivative of this piece, and then we have to multiply times this first piece.
So that times e to the x.
Interesting.
You can simplify this if you want, but you get the point.
I mean simplifying it from this point is really just kind of algebra.
And I think you get the idea.
Actually everything we're doing is algebra.
If you realize it looks like something fairly complicated, but we just use the chain and the product rules.
Let's do some more.
I will now switch to magenta.
We want to take the derivative dy/dx of let's see, some big expression.
let me do something creative.
Let's say the natural log of x over 3x plus 10.
So the natural log of x over 3x plus 10.
So you could use the quotient rule if you took the time to memorize it, which I've never taught you because it's really just the product rule.
So I like to just rewrite this as the product rule.
So they're the same thing.
Once again we're taking the derivative, so I'm not going to keep rewriting this, but this is the same thing as taking the derivative of the natural log of x times 3x plus ten to the negative 1 power.
3x plus 10 in the denominator is the same thing as 1 over 3x plus 10, which is the same thing as 3x plus 10 to the negative 1 power.
Now we can use the combination of the product and the chain rules, and we can solve this sucker.
So let's do it.
So we take the derivative of this first term the natural log of x and we learned in the last presentation the derivative of the natural log of x is 1/x, which is pretty cool in of itself.
And we multiply that times a second term.
So time 3x plus 10 to the negative 1 power.
And to that we add the derivative of the second term, and we're going to multiply that times the first term.
So first we're going to have to use the chain rule.
We take the derivative of the inside.
Well the derivative of the inside's easy.
The derivative of 3x x plus 10.
That's just 3.
And then we take the derivative of the whole thing, so it's negative 1.
That's 3 times negative 1 times that whole expression to the minus 2.
3x plus 10.
And of course this whole thing times the natural log of x.
We could simplify that.
Let's see.
This is 1/x and 3x plus 10 to negative 1.
So we could rewrite this as 1 over x 3x plus 10.
Let's see.
Plus 3 times minus 1.
So we could say that's the same thing as minus 3 ln of x over 3x plus 10 squared.
I think you see how I got from here to here.
I just manipulated the exponents and multiplied some numbers, et cetera, et cetera.
Let's do one more.
Just hit the point home.
You really have the tools now at your disposal to do a lot of derivative problems.
Probably most of the derivative problems you'll face in the first 1/2 year of calculus.
I'm going to switch to green.
Let's say y actually I'm tired of y.
Let's say that p is equal to I don't know.
Sin of x over cosine of x.
Let's figure out what dp/dx.
The rate at which p changes to x.
So once again this is the same thing as sin of x times cosine of x to the negative 1.
So we can just do the product and chain rules.
So the derivative of the first term.
Derivative of sin of x is cosine of x, times the second term.
Times cosine of x to the minus 1.
And then to that we add the derivative of the second term.
We have to use the chain real here.
So we take the derivative of the inside.
Well derivative of cosine x is minus sin of x.
And then times the derivative of the outside.
well that's minus 1 cosine of x to the minus 2, and then we multiply that times the first term, sin of x.
So let's simplify that.
So this is cosine of x divided by cosine of x.
You see how this cancels out? This is cosine of x over cosine of x, so this is equal to 1.
Cosine of x divided cosine of x is 1.
And then this minus sin cancels out with this minus sin, and we have sin times sin over cosine squared.
So this is equal to 1.
I'm going kind of fast because I'm about to run out of time, but I think you get what I'm doing.
So this is sin squared x over cosine squared x, which is actually equal to what's sin over cosine? 1 plus 10 squared x.
And if you know your trig identities, that equals 1 over cosine squared of x.
And, of course, what we just proved is that the derivative of the tangent of x is equal to the secant squared of x.
I hope I thoroughly confused you in that last problem.
I'll see you in the next presentation.
