Transcript for: Indefinite Integration (part 7) I'm now going to do it integration by parts problems.
I think it's just a fun problem to see because one, it's the example a lot of people use, sometimes even a trick problem that's given on a really hard math exam, or if you go to calculus competitions like I used to in high school.
Not to make myself too I was actually not that geeky as a high school student, but I have to admit, I was a mathlete.
But anyway, this is just a fun integration by parts problem because you actually never have to evaluate the final integral.
So let's say we want to take the integral it's a bit of a classic.
I wouldn't be surprised if your math teacher does the same problem for you, just to show you integration by parts.
Let's take the integral of e to the x you probably never heard of someone call a math problem a classic, but hopefully I will instill in you this love for mathematics and you will also consider this to be a classic problem.
e to the x times cosine of x.
I think you might already see where I'm going with this, because these are both fun functions, because e to the x you can take the derivative, you could take the anti-derivative and it still stays e to the x.
Cosine of x you take the derivative, you go to minus sign of x, you take the derivative again then you to minus cosine of x, then you take the derivative again then you get a plus sign of x.
It's like this cycle.
The same thing happens when you take the anti-derivative.
It's not as cool as e to the x, it doesn't stay exactly the same, but it kind of cycles.
If you take two anti-derivatives you get back to the negative of itself.
And if you take two derivatives, you get back to the negative of itself.
It's also a pretty cool function and I think you can start to see how integration by parts might be cool here.
Whenever I do integration by parts I always like to assume that this is the g prime of x.
That e to the x is g prime of x, because e to the x literally doesn't change.
Although we could do this problem the other way.
Maybe I'll experiment doing it the other way.
but let's assume this is g prime of x, and let's assume this f of x.
So this is derivative.
So integration by parts, as we take the original functions, g of x and f of x.
If this is g prime of x, what's go of x.
What's the anti-derivative of e to the x.
It's just use e to the x.
I'm going to switch colors, I don't like this blue.
So this is g of x.
I actually took the anti-derivative of it, but it's the same exact thing.
And then times f of x.
Then I want to subtract the indefinite integral of f prime of x.
One, g of x.
This is the same as this, which are both the anti-derivative of this, although they are all the same.
So this is g of x and then I would take the derivative of f of x.
f prime of x.
What's the derivative of cosine of x? It's minus sine of x.
So sine of x d x, it's minus sine of x.
I could put the minus here, that'll make it look messy, I could put the minus here that'll make it messy or I could just put minus here and make these minuses cancel out and I get a plus here.
So I get the integral of e to the x cosine of x d x is equal to e to the x cosine of x plus the integral of e to the x sine of x d x.
Hopefully I haven't confused you too much.
I should actually do some integration by parts problems without e to the x.
It's very hard to keep track of what I've done here.
This is the anti-derivative.
This is the anti-derivative and this is also the anti-derivative.
This is g prime of x, this is g of x.
So once again we are not clear whether we've made any progress.
We've gone from e to the x cosine of x to e to the x sine of x.
Let's take integration by parts again, see what happens.
I'm just going to write on the right side of the equal sign, because this might get a little long.
I'm just going to write this first part x to the x cosine of x plus and now let's do integration by parts again.
For this round of integration by parts this was g of x, but now, for this around, I'm going to assume it's g prime of x.
Which doesn't really make a difference because whenever I take the anti-derivative of it to g of x, it stays the same.
And then I'm going to assume that this is f of x.
So integration by parts tells us we take f of x times g of x, so I take this function and the anti-derivative of this function.
The anti-derivative of this function is once again just e to the x and then f times that function unchanged time sine of x.
From that I subtract the integral of the anti-derivative of this or I take g of x which is e to the x, and then the derivative of f of x, f prime of x.
What's the derivative of sine of x? It's cosine of x.
Cosine of x d of x.
Let's see if we're getting anywhere.
It seems like I just keep adding terms, making it more and more complicated.
In order to see if we're getting anywhere, let me just rewrite the whole thing and maybe get rid of these parenthesis, because it's just a plus, so we can get rid of the parenthesis.
Let me use a new color.
OK.
So this is the original problem, e to the x cosine of x d x equals, and now let me switch back to this color, it equals e to the x cosine of x, and then I can just this parentheses doesn't matter because I'm just adding everything in the parentheses e to x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of x minus e to the x cosine x access d x.
Now you might think that I arbitrarily switched colors here when I rewrote this, but if you look you might see why I actually did switch colors here.
See anything interesting? Exactly.
This is the same thing as this, just a minus right? So we're going to do something what I think to be fairly cool.
Let's add this term to both sides of the equation.
Let's take this and let's put it on to this side of the equation.
If I take this and put it on this side of the equation, what happens? I then have two of these on the left side equation, so that becomes I mean I could write it out it's e to the x cosine of x d x plus, right? Because I'm taking this and I'm putting it on that side of the equation, e to the x cosine of x d x.
That's just the same thing as 2 times the integral of e to the x cosine of x d x.
And then that equals this term.
Which equals e to the x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of x.
I know it's really messy.
All I have to do now to solve this integral is divide both sides by 2 and I'm done.
So let me write it out, this is very exciting, it's the home stretch.
If I divide both sides by 2, I get and I'm going to try to write it so you can see everything e to the x cosine of x d x equals and on that side I have e to the x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of x over 2.
I think that's pretty neat.
It's neat how integration by parts allowed us to do this.
We actually never even have to evaluate this integral.
We said, this integral is just the original problem again.
And you can think about why that happened, right? Because these trick functions cycle.
So we had to do integration by parts twice to get back to where we were before.
And then we use that to solve it without actually having to evaluate the integral.
And what I also think is cool is even if you just look at this solution, it's kind of neat, right? The anti-derivative of e to the x and actually never forget the plus c, that would've given me minus 1 point on the exam.
What's kind of cool, the integral of e to the x cosine of x is this expression that's e to the x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of x divided by 2.
It's the average of e to the x cosine of x and e to the x sine of x.
I think that's a pretty neat property, and you might want to graph them and play with them, but it's kind of neat.
Hopefully I have convinced you that is a classic of a problem, and you also find it neat, and I'll see you in the next presentation.
