Continuity on Intervals.
we'll discuss continuity on an interval and continuous functions.
We say that a function f of x is continuous on the open interval BC, if f of x is continuous at every point in that interval.
For x to be continuous on a closed interval BC, we require it to be continuous on every point in the interior of BC, but we just require it to be continuous from the right at B.
And from the left at sea.
We can also talk about f being continuous on half open intervals.
For example, on half open interval, BC, which is open at B and closed at sea, or the other way around, or the happy to open it all from B to infinity and so on.
In all of these cases, we require F to be continuous on the interior of the interval, and left or right continuous on the closed endpoints of the interval as appropriate.
So on what intervals is this function geovax continuous?
Well, it's continuous.
On this part, the arrows indicate it keeps on going.
So I'd say it's continuous from negative infinity to negative one, not including the endpoint negative one.
It's also continuous here, and we can include the endpoint this time.
So this is from negative one to one and Then again, on this last section, we can't include one.
It's not continuous there.
It's not even defined there.
So what kinds of functions are continuous?
What kinds of functions are continuous everywhere?
And by everywhere, I mean, on the entire real line negative infinity infinity?
Well, polynomials are a great example.
Also, sine x and cosine x, the absolute value of x is another common example.
There are certainly many other functions that are continuous on the whole real line.
I'll let you see if you can come up with some more examples.
Now, if we ask the second question, what kinds of functions are continuous on their domains, we get a lot more answers, not only polynomials, but also all rational functions, things like f of x equals 5x minus two over x minus three squared times x plus four is a good example of a rational function, even though it's not continuous everywhere.
Because it's not continuous when x equals three or negative four, it is continuous on its whole domain, because three and four are not in the domain of this rational function.
In addition, all trig functions, inverse trig functions, log and either the x functions.
And pretty much all the functions we normally encounter are continuous on their domains, although their domains are not necessarily the whole real line.
For example, for natural log of x, the domain is just zero, infinity, and that's where the function is continuous.
In addition, the sums, differences, products and quotients of continuous functions are continuous on their domains, so for example, y equals sine of x plus the natural log of x is continuous where it's defined, the compositions of continuous functions are continuous on their domains.
So for example, the function y equals ln of sine of x is continuous, where defined turns out to be a bunch of disjoint intervals where sine is positive.
Since continuity is defined in terms of limits, it's sometimes possible to use our knowledge of which functions are continuous to calculate limits.
For example, if we want to find the limit as x goes to zero of cosine of x, because cosine is continuous, we can evaluate this limit just by plugging in zero for x.
And cosine of zero is one.
We're using the definition of continuity here to say that the limit of the function is equal to the value of the function.
The second example is a little trickier, because the function inside is not continuous at x equals two.
In fact, it's not defined at x equals two.
But as X approaches 2x squared minus four over 2x minus four times pi, can be rewritten as x plus two times x minus two over two times x minus two times pi, which is the same thing as x plus two over two pi.
For x not equal to two.
So as X approaches two, this expression here, approaches two plus two over two times pi, which is just two pi.
In other words, the limit as x goes to two of x squared minus four over 2x minus four pi is just two pi.
And therefore, the limit as x goes to two of cosine of this expression is just cosine of two pi, which is again equal to one.
We're using here the fact that cosine is continuous, and a property of continuous functions, which says that the limit as x goes to a of f of g of x is equal to f of the limit as x goes to a of g of x.
If f is a continuous function.
In other words, for continuous functions, you can pass the limit inside the function.
That's all for continuity on intervals and continuous functions.
The intermediate value