Graphs and Limits.
the idea of limits through some graphs and examples.
When I worked in San Francisco, I used to eat at Julia sushi and salad bar that had an interesting price structure, the food there cost $10 a pound.
But if you happen to load up your plate to exactly one pound, you got a free lunch.
So let's let y equals f of x represent the price of your lunch in dollars as a function of its weight x in pounds.
And I want to write an equation to describe f of x as a piecewise defined function.
It makes sense to use a piecewise defined function.
Because there are two situations, the weight x could be exactly one pound, or it could be different from one pound.
If the weight is exactly one pound, then f of x The price is zero.
But if x is different from a pound, then the price is 10 times x as a graph, my function is going to follow the line y equals 10x.
But when x is exactly one, my function is going to have a value of zero and not 10.
The open circle here represents a hole or a place where a point is missing on the graph.
Now when x is near one, but not equal to one, then the F of X values that is the y values are very close to 10.
In the language of limits, we say that the limit as x approaches one of F have x is equal to Ted.
More informally, we can write, as x approaches one, f of x approaches 10.
Notice that the value of f at one is actually equal to zero, not 10.
And so the limit of f of x as x goes to one, and the value of f at one, are not equal.
This illustrates the important fact that the limit here as x goes to one doesn't care about the value of f, at one, it only cares about the value of f, when x is near one, in general, for any function f of x, and for real numbers, a and L, the limit as x goes to a of f of x equals L means that f of x gets arbitrarily close to L, as x gets arbitrarily close to a, in other words, as x heads towards a, f of x heads towards L.
Let me draw this as a picture.
In this picture, I can say that the limit as x goes to a of f of x is L.
Because by taking a sufficiently small interval around a of x values, I can guarantee that my y values, my f of x values lie in an arbitrarily small interval around L.
Now the limit doesn't care about s value at exactly a.
So if I change the function, if I change the functions value at a, or even leave the function undefined at a, the limit is still L.
But the limit does care about what happens for x values on both sides of a.
If, for example, the function didn't even exist for x values bigger than a, then we could no longer say that the limit, as x approached a was out, the limit would not exist.
In other words, the limit of f of x is L, only if the y values are approaching now, as x approaches a from both the left and the right.
For the function g of x graph below, the limit as x goes to two of g of x does not exist.
Because the y values approach one as the x values approach two from the left and the y values approach three, as the x values approach two from the right.
Although the limit doesn't exist, we can say that the left sided limit exists.
And we write this as limit as x goes to two from the left of g of x is equal to one.
The superscript minus sign here means that x is going to two from the left side.
In other words, the x values are less than two and approaching two.
Similarly, we can talk about right sided limits.
In this example, the limit as x goes to two from the right side of g of x is three.
And here, the superscript plus side means that we're approaching two from the right side.
In other words, our x values are greater than to and approaching to.
In general, the limit as x goes to a minus of f of x equals L means that f of x approaches L, as x approaches a from the left, and the limit as x goes to a plus of f of x equals our means that f of x approaches our as x approaches a from the right limits from the left or from the right are also called one sided limits.
In this last example, let's look at the behavior of y equals h of x graph below when x is near negative two.
As x approaches negative two from the right, our Y values are getting arbitrarily large, larger than any real number we might choose.
We can write this in terms of limits by saying the limit as x goes to negative two from the right of h of x is equal to infinity.
As x approaches negative two from the left, the y values are getting smaller.
In fact, they go below any negative real number we might choose.
In terms of limits, we can say that the limit as x goes to negative two from the left of h of x is negative infinity.
In this example, the limit of h of x as x goes to negative two, not specifying from the left or the right means we have to approach negative two from both sides.
And so this limit does not exist, because the limits from the left and the limit from the right are heading in opposite directions.
I want to mention that some people say that the limits from the right and the limits from the left also do not exist.
Because the functions don't approach any finite number.
I prefer to say that these limits do not exist as a finite number.
But they do exist as infinity and negative infinity.
This video introduced the idea of limits, and one sided limits and infinite limits.
This video gives some examples of when limits fail to exist.
For this function, 