[Corequisite] Graphs of Sinusoidal Functions.
like stretching and shrinking and shifting.
This video is about graphing these functions.
Let's start by graphing the function, y equals three sine of 2x.
This function is related to the function y equals sine x.
So I'll graph that first.
Now, the three on the outside stretches this graph vertically by a factor of three, while the two on the inside compresses that horizontally by a factor of one half.
If instead I want to graph y equals three sine 2x plus one, this plus one on the outside shifts everything up by one unit.
Let's compare the midline amplitude and period of our original y equals sine x are transformed y equals three sine 2x.
And our further transformed y equals three sine 2x plus one, the original sine has a midline at y equals zero, an amplitude of one and a period of two pi.
For the transformed function, y equals three times sine of 2x.
The two on the inside shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half.
So it changes the period of two pi into a period of one half times two pi, which is pi.
Since the two on the inside only affects x values and horizontal distances, it doesn't affect the midline, which is a y value, or the amplitude, which is a vertical distance.
But the three on the outside does affect these things.
Well, in particular, it affects the amplitude, since everything is stretched out vertically by a factor of three, the amplitude of one get stretch to an amplitude of three.
In this case, the midline doesn't actually change, because multiplying a y value of zero by three is still a y value of zero.
Now on the third function, we've taken the second function and added one on the outside, so that shifts everything up by one.
Therefore, instead of having a midline at y equals zero, we now have a midline at y equals one.
The amplitude doesn't change though it's still three because shifting everything up by one doesn't affect the distance between the mid mind and the end the maximum point.
Also, the period is still pi since the period is a horizontal measure, and adding one on the outside only affects vertical things.
Now next, let's graph the function y equals three times sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four.
This function is very closely related to the First function we graphed on the previous page, that was y equals three sine of 2x.
In fact, if we give the name f of x to that function, and maybe we can call g of x, this other function, then we can get g of x by taking f of x and plugging in x minus pi over four in for x.
In other words, g of x is f of x minus pi over four.
This relationship gives me an idea for graphing g of x, the function we want to graph, we can first graph f of x, we already did that on the previous page.
And then we can shift its graph to the right by pi over four, because that's what you do when you subtract a number on the inside of a function.
So here's the graph of y equals three sine 2x.
Recall that it's just the graph of sine stretched vertically by a factor of three, and shrunk horizontally by a factor of one half.
Now, to graph the function that I want, I'm going to shift this graph over by pi over four to the right.
Notice that since I had my function written in factored form, I could just read off the horizontal shift.
But if I had written it instead, as y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two, which is algebraically equivalent, it would be easy to get confused and think that I needed to shift over by pi over two.
So it's best to factor first, before figuring out what the shift is, we're factoring out the coefficient of x.
If instead, we wanted to graph this function, same as the one we just graphed, it's just with a minus one on the outside, that minus one would just bring everything down by one.
Let's take a moment to look at midline amplitude, and period for the original parent function, y equals sine of x, and our final transformed function, y equals three sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four minus one, our original sine function has midline at y equals zero amplitude of one and period of two pi.
For our transform function, the three on the outside stretches vertically, so it makes the amplitude three.
The minus one on the outside shifts everything down by one.
So it brings the midline, y equals zero, down to Y equals negative one, the two on the inside, shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half.
So the period becomes one half times two pi, which is pi.
Finally, there's a horizontal shift going on our transformed function shifts to the right, by pi over four, this horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift.
The function we just analyzed was y equals three sine 2x minus pi over four minus one, which could also be written as y equals three sine 2x minus pi over two minus one.
This is a function of the form y equals a sine B x minus c plus d, where b is positive.
If we have a function of this form, or the similar function with cosine in it, then we know that the midline is going to be at y equals D.
That's because the original midline of sine or cosine at y equals zero gets shifted up by D, we know that the amplitude is going to be a because this A multiplied on the outside stretches everything vertically by a factor of A.
to be a little more accurate, we should say the amplitude is the absolute value of A in case a is negative.
If a is negative, then that amounts to a vertical reflection or a reflection over the x axis.
We know that the period of the original sine or cosine is two pi.
And we know that this factor of B amounts to a horizontal shrink by a factor of one over B or I guess it could be a horizontal stretch by a factor of one over b If b is less than one, so because we're starting with a period of two pi, and we're multiplying by one over B, our new period is going to be two Pi over B.
The trickiest thing is the horizontal shift.
And to get that right, I like to factor out this B for my equation.
So instead of writing y equals a cosine bx minus c plus d, I'm going to write y equals A cosine B times quantity x minus c over b plus d.
Similarly, if it's a sine function, I write y equals a sine B times x minus quantity c over b plus d, then I can read off the horizontal shift as C over B.
And that'll be a shift to the right, if C over B is positive and a shift to the left, if C over b is negative, this might seem backwards from what you're used to, but it's because we have that minus sign there.
So if C over B is positive, we're actually subtracting on the inside.
So that shifts right, if C of b over b is negative minus a negative is actually adding something, and that's why it shifts it to the left.
So as one final example, say I wanted to graph y equals 1/3, cosine of one half x plus three minus five, that would have a midline at y equals minus five, an amplitude of 1/3, a period of two pi divided by one half, which is four pi, and a horizontal shift.
Better rewrite this horizontal shift of six units to the left, the horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift.
And that's all for graphs of sinusoidal functions.
This video