[Corequisite] Pythagorean Identities.
for another video coming soon on proofs.
This video is about identities involving trig functions like sine and cosine.
But I want to start with some examples that just involve In the third example, g of x is one over x to the 3.
7.
Again, we need to do a little rewriting before we can apply the power rule.
So I'm going to rewrite g of x as x to the minus 3.
7.
Using exponent rules, now I can find dg dx by pulling down the negative 3.
7 multiplying in the front, and now I have to reduce negative 3.
7 by one, so I subtract one that gives me x to the negative 4.
7.
Again, I can rewrite this if I wish as negative 3.
7 over x to the 4.
7.
It's important to notice that in all these examples and in fact, in any example where the power rule applies, the variable x is in the base.
And the exponent is just a constant, just a real number.
The constant multiple rules says that if c is just a constant real number, and f is a differentiable function, then the derivative of C times f of x is just c times the derivative of f of x.
In other words, when we take the derivative, we can just pull a constant outside of the derivative sign.
Let's use this rule in an example.
If we want to take the derivative of 5x cubed, that's the same thing as five times the derivative of x cubed.
And now using the power rule, we can bring down the three and get 15x squared.
f and g are differentiable functions, then the derivative of f of x plus g of x is the derivative of f plus the derivative of g.
Similarly, for a difference, if f and g are differentiable functions, then the derivative of the difference is just the difference of the derivatives.
Now let's use all these rules together to calculate the derivative of this polynomial.
To find the y dx, we can use the sum and difference rule to calculate the derivative of each term separately.
Now using the constant multiple rule and the power rule, we can bring out the seven, bring down the three getting x squared here, similarly, for the next term, five times two times x to the one, four times the derivative of x, which is just one, and the derivative of a constant two is just zero.
So simplifying, we get 21x squared minus 10x plus four, and notice that the derivative of the original polynomial is just another polynomial of one less degree.
In this video, we use some shortcuts to calculate the derivatives of various functions, especially polynomials.
If you're interested in seeing where these rules come from, how they're derived from the limit definition of derivative, then look for another video coming soon on proofs.
This video is about identities involving trig functions like sine and cosine.
But I want to start with some examples that just involve quadratic functions.
If I want to find the solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus 6x minus seven equals zero, factor it, x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors equal to 0x minus seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero.
And that gives me the solutions, x equals seven, or x equals negative one.
Next, let's look at this more complicated equation.
I'm going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side.
Next, our combined terms on the right hand side.
So that gives me x squared minus 6x on both sides, well, x squared minus 6x is equal to x squared minus