Polynomial and Rational Inequalities.
the negative one and the negative sign here cancel, so I get plus a plus x.
On the denominator, I have one plus a plus x squared over a minus x squared, multiplied by a minus x squared.
canceling in the numerator, I get to a and distributing and the denominator I get a minus x squared plus a plus x squared.
If I expand out the denominator, the same simplifies to two a over two A squared plus 2x squared, or just a over a squared plus x squared, which is a pretty nice derivative.
So now you know the derivatives of the inverse trig functions.
And you also know how to find them using implicit differentiation, if you ever forget them.
When two or more quantities are related by an equation, then their rates of change over time are also related.
That's the idea behind related rates.
And this video gives an example of related rates involving distances.
A tornado is 20 miles west of us, heading due east towards Phillips Hall at a rate of 40 miles per hour.
you hop on your bike and ride due south at a speed of 12 miles per hour.
How fast is the distance between you and the tornado changing after 15 minutes.
In a related rates problem, it's always a good idea to draw a picture first, that can help you uncover the geometry of the problem and see how quantities are related.
In this problem, we have a right triangle.
Because the tornadoes traveling due east and the bicycles traveling due south at right angles.
Let's assign variables to the quantities of interest.
I'll call the distance between the tornado and Phillips Hall a.
Although it starts at 20 miles, it varies with time, and therefore it's a good idea to assign it a letter a variable.
I'll use B to refer to the distance between Philips Hall and the bicycle, a quantity that also varies with time.
And I'll let c stand for the distance between the tornado and the bicycle.
The problem asks us to find how fast this distance is changing.
In other words, DC dt.
The next step is to write down equations that relate the quantities of interest.
In this problem, we know by the Pythagorean Theorem, that a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
We're interested in how fast the distance between you and the tornado is changing.
That's a rate of change.
And the rate at which the bicycle is traveling and the tornado is moving.
These are also rates of change.
In order to work these rates of change into the problem, I'm going to take the derivative of both sides of this equation with respect to time.
That's the third step.
So I'm going to take DDT of a squared plus b squared.
And that's equal to DDT of C squared.
Notice that I'm thinking of a B and C as functions of T here, since they vary over time, on the left side, I get to a times dA DT using the chain rule, plus two B DB dt.
And on the right side, I get to see DC dt.
Now I can use the information given to me in the problem to plug in numbers and solve for the quantity of interest DC DT since the tornado was moving at a rate of 40 miles per hour The distance between the tornado and Philip's Hall is decreasing at 40 miles per hour.
In other words, da dt is negative 40.
That negative sign is important here, and comes from the fact that the distance is decreasing.
Since the bicycle is moving at 12 miles per hour, the distance between Philips Hall and the bicycle is increasing at a rate of 12 miles per hour.
So DBT is positive 12.
The quantity is a, b and c are constantly changing.
But at the time of interest, t equals 15 minutes or in hours, 0.
25 hours, we can figure out what a B and C are.
The tornado is starts 20 miles away, but it's moving at a rate of 40 miles per hour.
So after a quarter of an hour, it's gone 10 miles, that means after a quarter of an hour, it's only 10 miles away.
And so at the time of point two, five hours, a equals 10.
The bike is moving at 12 miles per hour.
So after a quarter of a mile, it's gone three miles.
And so at this time, b equals three.
Now using the same equation we started with, we can plug in a and b and solve for C, we know that c squared is going to be 10 squared plus three squared.
So C is going to be the square root of 109.
Plugging in the numbers into this equation, we get two times 10 times negative 40 plus two times three times 12 equals two times the square root of 109 times DC dt.
So DC dt is going to be negative 800 plus 72 over two times a squared of 109, which is approximately negative 35.
In other words, the distance between the tornado and us is decreasing at 35 miles per hour, the tornado is gaining on us quickly.
These same steps will get you through a variety of related rates problems.
A couple of cautionary notes.
Don't plug in numbers to send.
Any quantities that vary with time should be written as variables, so you can properly take the derivative with respect to time.
In addition, be careful to use negative numbers for negative rates of change.
That is, for quantities that are decreasing, we wouldn't have gotten the right answer if we hadn't have used a negative 40 for the rate of change of the distance here.
In this video, we solved the related rates problem, and found that riding a bicycle may not be the best way to escape a tornado.
In this classic related rates problem, water's flowing into a cone shaped tank, and we have to figure out how fast the water is rising.
Water flows into a tank at a rate of three cubic meters per minute, the tank is shaped like a cone with a height of four meters, and a radius of five meters at the top, we're supposed to find the rate at which the water level is rising in the tank.
When the water height is two meters.
we've drawn our picture.
Now let's label some quantities of interest.
It's fine to use numbers for the quantities that stay fixed throughout the problem.
Like the dimensions of the tank.
For any quantities that are varying with time, I need to use letters variables to represent those quantities.
So the height of the water is varying throughout the problem.
I'll call that H.
And it might be handy to also talk about the radius of the part of the cone that's filled with water.
I'll call that our ultimately I want to find the rate at which the water level is rising.
So that's DHD T.
Next, I want to write down equations that relate the quantities of interest.
From geometry, I know that the volume of a cone is 1/3 times the area of the base times the height.
So the volume of water in the cone is going to be 1/3 times pi r squared times h since h is the height of the piece of the code that contains water.
And pi r squared is the area of that circular base for that piece of account.
I'm calling it the base even though it's at the top.
There's one more equation that's going to be handy here that comes from similar triangles.
From similar triangles, we know the ratio of sides for the little triangle here is the same as the ratio of sides for the big triangle.
In other words, we know that our over h is going to be equal to five over four.
I can use this relationship to eliminate one of the variables in this equation.
Let's think for a minute which one we want to eliminate.
Since we're ultimately interested in finding DHD T, we need to keep the variable h in here.
But since we don't have any information about how are you changing, it's a good idea to get rid of the R.
So let's solve for r here.
And we get r equals five fourths times h, and plug that back into our volume equation.
So we get v equals 1/3 pi times five fourths h squared times h.
Or in other words, V equals 25/48 pi h cubed.
Now we're gonna derive both sides of the equation with respect to time t, to get rates of change into the problem.
Remember that we're thinking of the volume of water and the height of water as functions of time t, we get dv dt equals 2548.
It's pi times three h squared DHD t.
Now let's plug in numbers and solve for the quantity of interest DHD T.
From our problem, we know that water's flowing into the tank at a rate of three cubic meters per minute.
So dv dt is three, we're asked to find the rate at which the water level is rising when the water height is two meters.
So that's when h is two.
Plugging in those values and solving for a DHD T, we get d h dt is equal to three divided by 2540.
It's pi times three times two squared, which is 12 over 25 pi meters per second, are about point one five meters per second.
This video solve the related rates problem involving volume, and use the trick of finding similar triangles to eliminate one variable.
In this video, we'll do a related rates problem involving rotation and angles.
a lighthouse that's half a mile west of shore, has a rotating light that makes two revolutions per minute in the counterclockwise direction, the shore runs north south, and there's a cave directly east of the lighthouse.
How fast is the beam of light moving along the shore at a point one mile north of the cave.
we've drawn a picture.
Now let's label it with variables for all the quantities that are changing with time, the distance between the lighthouse and the cave that's fixed.
So we don't have to put a variable for that.
But the distance between the cave and the point on the shore where the light is hitting, that's varying.
So I'll call that say x.
Since we want to know how fast the beam of light is moving, we're going to want to know how that distance x is changing.
In other words, we want to calculate dx dt, when x is one.
The high partners of this right triangle made by the beam of light is also changing with time as as the angle here between the beam of light and the East West line, I'll call that angle theta.
And the angle up here, I suppose is also changing and call that fee.
This angle is the right angle between the East West line and the north south line.
So that doesn't change, it's always 90 degrees.
Next, we want to write down equations to relate the quantities of interest.
Whenever I see a right triangle in a problem, I'm tempted to write down the Pythagorean theorem, which in this case would say one half squared plus x squared equals h squared.
But in this particular problem, it doesn't look like that's going to help us much because of a tiger in theory and would relate x and h.
But we don't have any information about how H is changing.
The only rate of change information given to us is this two revolutions per minute.
Two revolutions per minute is indirectly telling us how this angle theta is changing.
Because if the light beam is making two revolutions per minute, then since they're two pi radians in a revolution, that amounts to a change of four pi radians per minute for the angle theta.
Therefore I'd really like to write down the equation that has to do with theta and x.
And from trig, I know that tangent of theta is opposite over adjacent.
So I can write down tangent theta equals x divided by one half.
Or in other words, tangent theta is 2x.
This is the equation that I need that relates x and theta.
Now I'm going to derive both sides with respect to time t.
And I get second squared theta, d theta dt equals two times dx dt.
Next, I can plug in numbers and solve for my quantity of interest, which is dx dt when x equals one.
We already figured out from the two revolutions per minute, that d theta dt is four pi.
Now secant theta is one over cosine theta.
And since cosine theta is adjacent ever had partners, it's reciprocal is high partners over adjacent.
So in our picture, that gives us h over one half.
Well, when x equals one, H, is going to be the square root of one squared plus a half squared by the Pythagorean Theorem.
And we'll divide that by one half.
And simplifying, we get the square root of five fourths divided by one half, which ends up as the square root of five.
So let's plug these values into our equation involving derivatives.
And we get the square root of five squared per second squared times four pi, four d theta dt equals two times dx dt.
Solving for dx dt, we get dx dt is five times four pi divided by two, or 10 pi.
So what are the units here on dx dt, since our distance has been in miles, and our time is in minutes, this is 10 pi miles per minute.
If I want to convert this to more standard units of miles per hour, I can just multiply my 10 pi miles per minute by 60 minutes per hour to get 600 pi miles per hour.
That works out to about 1885 miles per hour, which is pretty darn fast.
In this related rates problem, we related rotations per minute, to a change in angle per minute.
And we use the trig equation to relate angle and side length.
solving a right triangle means finding the length of all the sides and the measures of the angles given partial information.
In this example, we're given the length of one side and the measure of one angle, plus we know the measure of this right angle is 90 degrees, we need to find the measure of the third angle labeled capital A, and the length of the two sides labeled lowercase b and lowercase C.
To find the measure of angle A, let's use the fact that the measures of the three angles of a triangle add up to 180 degrees.
So that means that 49 degrees plus 90 degrees plus a is equal to 180 degrees.
So A is equal to 180 degrees minus 90 degrees minus 49 degrees, which works out to 41 degrees.
To find the length of the side D we have a couple of possible options.
We could use the fact that tan of 49 degrees, which is opposite over adjacent is B over 23.
So b is 23 times tan 49 degrees, which works out to 26.
46 units.
Alternatively, we could use the fact that tan of 41 degrees is 23 over b since now if we're looking at the angle here 23 is our opposite and B is an adjacent That's a little bit harder to solve algebraically.
But we can write B tan 41 degrees equals 23, which means that B is 23 divided by tan 41 degrees.
With a calculator that works out again to 26.
46.
The reason we want to use 10 in this problem and not say sine or cosine is because 10 of say 49 degrees relates, and the unknown side that we're looking for be to the side that we know the measure of, if we had use sine instead, would be saying that sine of 49 is B over C, and we'd have two unknowns, which would make it difficult to solve.
Next, to find the side length C, we can have a few options, we could use a trig function again, for example, we could use the cosine of 49 degrees, that's adjacent over hypotenuse, which is 23 oversee.
Solving for C, we get that C is 23 over cosine 49, which works out to 35.
06 units.
Another option would be to use the Pythagorean Theorem to find C.
Since we know 23 squared plus b squared equals c squared.
In other words, that's 23 squared plus 26.
46 squared equals c squared, which means that C is the square root of that song, which works out again, to 35.
06.
To review, the ideas we used were, the sum of the angles is equal to 180 degrees.
We used facts like tangent of an angle being opposite over adjacent and similar facts about sine and cosine.
And we use the Pythagorean Theorem.
This allowed us to find all the angles and side lengths of the triangle, knowing just the side length of one side and the angle of one of the non right angles to begin with.
In this next example, we don't know any of the angles except for the right angle, but we know to have the side lengths.
To find the unknown angle theta, we can use the fact that cosine theta is adjacent overhype hotness, so that's 10 over 15.
Cosine is a good trig function to use here, because this equation relates our unknown angle to our two known sides.
So we just have one unknown in our equation to solve for.
To solve for theta, we just take the cosine inverse of 10/15, which is 0.
8411 radians, or 48.
19 degrees.
To find the measure of angle fee, we could use the fact that sine of fee is 10 over 15 and take sine inverse of 10/15.
But probably a little easier, let's just use the fact that these three angles do 180 degrees.
That tells us that fee plus 90 plus 48.
19 is equal to 180.
Which means that fee is 41.
81.
Finally, we can find x either using a trig function, or by using the Pythagorean Theorem.
To find it using a trig function, we could write down something like tan of 48.
19 degrees is x over 10.
To find that using the Tyrion theorem, we'd write down 10 squared plus x squared equals 15 squared.
I'll use a Pythagorean theorem and find the x by doing the square root of 15 squared minus 10 squared.
That gives me an answer of 11.
18.
Notice that we use many of the same ideas as in the previous problem.
For example, the fact that the sum of the angles is 180.
The Pythagorean theorem and the trig functions like tan, sine and cosine, we also use the inverse trig functions to get from an equation like this one to the angle.
This video showed how it's possible to find the length of all the sides of a right triangle, and the measures of all the angles given partial information.
For example, the measure of one angle and one side or from two sides.
This video gives some definitions and facts related to maximum and minimum values.
functions.
function f of x has an absolute maximum at the x value of C.
If f of c is greater than or equal to f of x for all x in the domain of f.
The point with x&y coordinates of C FRC is called an absolute maximum point.
And the y value f of c is called the absolute maximum value.
Now, if I draw a graph of f, the y value f of c is the highest value that that function ever achieves.
And an absolute maximum point is just a point where it achieves that maximum value.
Now, it's possible for a function to have more than one absolute maximum point, if there happens to be a tie for the highest value.
But a function has at most one absolute maximum value.
A function f of x has an absolute minimum that x equals C, if f of c is less than or equal to f of x, for all x in the domain of f.
In this case, the point c f of c is called an absolute minimum point.
And the y value f of c is called the absolute minimum value.
In the graph of f of x, f of c is now the lowest point that the function achieves anywhere on its domain, and C SOC, are the coordinates of a point where the function achieves that minimum value.
For example, this function has an absolute minimum value of about negative eight has an absolute minimum point with coordinates three, negative eight.
If this function stops here, and just has a domain from zero to four, then the function has an absolute maximum value of 10 at the absolute maximum point with coordinates for 10.
If however, the function keeps going in this direction, it will not have an absolute maximum value at all.
absolute maximum and minimum values can also be called global maximum and minimum values.
In addition to absolute maximum mins, we can talk about local maximums.
So a function f of x has a local maximum at x equals C.
If f of c is greater than or equal to f of x, for all x, near C.
By near C, we mean there's some open interval around C for which this was true.
For our graph of f, we have a local maximum right here.
Even though it's not the highest point anywhere around since there's a higher point up here, this is the highest point in an open interval around see the point C FFC is called a local maximum point.
And the y value f FC is called a local maximum value.
Similarly, a function f of x has a local minimum at x equals C, if f of c is less than or equal to f of x for all x, near C.
And the point c f of c is called a local minimum point.
And the y value f of c is called a local minimum value.
A function might have many local minimum values.
In this example, assuming that the domain is zero to four, we have a local minimum point right here.
Because it's the lowest point anywhere nearby.
It also happens to be an absolute minimum point.
Now turning our attention to local maximums, we have a local maximum point right here with coordinates about one two.
Since f of one is as high or higher than f of x for any x value in an open interval around one.
In this example, the absolute maximum point of 410 does not count as a local maximum point.
Simply because we can't take an open interval on both sides of for the function doesn't exist on the right side.
And so for that sort of technical reason, we end up with an absolute maximum point That's not a local maximum point here.
local maximum and minimum values can also be called relative maximum and minimum values.
Please take a look at this graph and pause the video for a moment to mark all local maximum minimum points, as well as all global, that is absolute maximum points.
See if you can find the absolute maximum value and the absolute minimum value for the function.
I'm going to mark the local maximum points in green, and the absolute maximum points in red.
The function definitely has a local men here.
Since this is the lowest point anywhere nearby and then open interval, and there's a local max point here.
There's also a local min point here, where the function also hits a low point and open interval.
But that local man is also an absolute man.
So I'll mark it half green and half red.
There's also a local min point here at the point three, two, since this point is the as low or lower than any point in an open interval.
And the function is defined in an open interval around three, even though it's discontinuous there.
In fact, this point is tied for local minimum, with all the points on this interval here, between two and three, there are as low or lower than all points in an open interval around them.
The point 04 doesn't count as a local max, because the function is not defined on the other side of zero.
So there's no open interval to to consider.
This point is also not an absolute maximum because the function gets higher over here.
In fact, as long as this trend continues, the function f of x has no absolute maximum value at all, because its values just keep getting higher and higher as x goes off to infinity.
There's one more point that I want to consider.
And that's this point here, at three, three and a half.
Well, it's tempting to say that f has a local maximum here, it looks like it's the highest point in the ground.
But in fact, there is no point here at three 3.
5.
Right, the functions value at three is actually down here, too.
So there's no point here to be a local maximum point.
And if you start looking at points really close to that point, those aren't local maximums either, because you can always find a point just a little bit higher as you get closer and closer, but don't quite reach this missing point of three 3.
5.
So we have all the absolute and local maximum points marked.
And now to find the absolute maximum value.
Well, we just said that there is none.
But the absolute minimum value is the y value of this absolute minimum point here.
So I'd say that's about 0.
5.
Here I've drawn the graph of a function.
What do you notice about the derivative of this function at its local maximum and minimum points, please pause the video and think about it.
Well, the local maximum minimum points are here, here and here.
And at two of those points, the derivative f prime of c equals zero.
And that the third point, f prime of c does not exist, because the function has a corner.
A number c is called a critical number for a function f if f prime of c does not exist, or f prime of c exists and equals zero.
So in other words, all of these local maximum minimum points for this example, they're all critical points.
And this is true in general, if f has a local max or min at C, then C must be a critical number for F.
We also say that the point c f of c is a critical point for F.
It's important not to read too much into this statement.
The statement says that if f has a local max or man at C then C must be a critical number.
But the converse doesn't hold.
In other words, if c is a critical number, then f may or may not have a local max or men at sea.
One example to keep in mind is the function f of x equals x cubed at a value of C of zero.
Since f prime of x is 3x squared, we have that f prime of zero equals zero.
So zero is a critical number.
But notice that F does not have a local maximum man at x equals zero.
In this video, we defined absolute and local, maximum and minimums.
We also defined critical numbers, which are numbers c, where f prime of c equals zero, or f prime of c does not exist.
We noted that if f has a local max or min at C, then C is a critical number.
But not necessarily advice.
In this video, we'll see how the first derivative and the second derivative can help us find local maximums and local minimums for a function.
Recall that f of x has a local maximum at x equals C.
If f of c is greater than or equal to f of x, for all x, in an open interval around C, F of X has a local minimum at x equals C.
If f of c is less than or equal to f of x, for all x, in an open interval around C.
In this example, the function f has a local maximum at x equals six at x equals 11.
And a local minimum at x equals about 10.
We've seen before that if f has a local max or local min at x equals C, then f prime of c is equal to zero or it does not exist.
Number C at which f prime of c is zero or does not exist, are called critical numbers.
But you have to be careful, because it is possible for F to have a critical number at C.
That is a place where if privacy is equal to zero, or does not exist, but not have a local max, or min at x equals C.
In fact, this happens in the graph above, at x equals two, since f prime of two is zero, but there's no local max or min there.
Please pause the video for a moment and try to figure out what's different about the derivative of f in the vicinity of x equals two, where there's no local max or min, and in the vicinity of x equals 610 and 11 where there are local maxes and mins.
Near the critical point at x equals two, the derivative is positive on the left and positive again on the right.
But near the local maximums, the derivative is positive on the left and negative on the right.
And near the local minimum, the derivative is negative on the left and positive on the right.
These observations help motivate the first derivative test for finding local maximums and minimums.
The first derivative test says that if f is a continuous function near x equals C, and if c is a critical number, then we can decide if f has a local maximum or minimum at x equals c by looking at the first derivative near x equals C.
More specifically, if we know that f prime of x is positive for x less than c, and negative for x greater than c, then our function looks something like this.
Or maybe like this, your x equals C, and so we have a local max at x equals C.
If on the other hand, f prime of x is negative for x less than c, and positive for x greater than c, then our function looks something like this.
Or maybe like this, your x equals C and so we have local men at x equals see.
If our first derivative is positive on both sides of C or negative on both sides of C, then we do not have a look All extreme point at all at x equals C.
Instead, our graph might look something like this, or maybe like this.
The first derivative test is great, because it lets us locate local extreme points just by looking at the first derivative.
The second derivative test gives us an alternative for finding local maximum points by using the second derivative.
Specifically, the second derivative test tells us that if f is continuous near x equals C, then if f prime of c is equal to zero, and f double prime of c is greater than zero, then f has a local min at x equals C.
If on the other hand, f prime of c equals zero, and f double prime of c is less than zero, then f has a local max at x equals C.
Note that if f double prime of c is equal to zero, or does not exist, then the second derivative test is inconclusive.
We might have a local max or a local man at x equals C, or we might not.
So we'd have to use a different method like the first derivative test to find out.
In this video, we introduced the first derivative test and the second derivative test, which allow us to determine if a function has a local minimum or a local maximum at a certain value of x.
In this video, I'll work through two examples of finding extreme values, that is, maximum values and minimum values of functions.
In the first example, we're asked to find the absolute maximum and minimum values for this rational function g of x on the interval from zero to four, these maximum and minimum values could occur at critical numbers in the interior of the interval, or they could occur at the endpoints of the interval.
So we'll need to check the critical numbers, and check the endpoints and compare our values.
To find the critical numbers, those are the numbers where g prime of x is equal to zero or does not exist.
So let's take the derivative g prime of x using the quotient rule.
So we get x squared plus x plus two squared on the denominator, and then we have low times d high, the derivative of the numerator is one minus high times the derivative of the denominator, that's 2x plus one.
Before we figure out where that zero or doesn't exist, let's simplify it a little bit.
So we can multiply out the numerator.
I'll distribute the negative sign.
And I'll add together like terms in the numerator, I'm just leaving the denominator alone on all these steps.
So our simplified numerator is going to be minus x squared plus 2x plus three.
Now that I've simplified the derivative, I can figure out where it's equal to zero and where it doesn't exist.
Let me clear a little space.
Now the only way that g prime of x could not exist, is if the denominator is zero.
But on our interval, where x is between zero and 4x squared plus x plus two is always greater than or equal to two.
So the denominator is never zero on this interval.
In fact, it turns out that x squared plus x plus two is never zero, even if we look outside this interval.
And you can check that if you want to use the quadratic formula.
But in any case, we don't have to worry about the places where g prime of x does not exist.
So we only have to worry where g prime of x is equal to zero.
To find where g prime of x is equal to zero, we just have to check where the numerator is equal to zero.
So I'll set negative x squared plus 2x plus three equal to zero and multiply both sides there by negative one and a factor I get that x equals three or x equals minus one.
So these are my critical numbers.
But notice that one of these critical numbers negative one doesn't even lie within my interval, so I don't have to worry about it.
All I have to worry about is x equals 3x equals three is one place where my function g could have an absolute maximum or minimum.
So let's figure out G's value there by plugging in three for x that evaluates to to 14th, or one set So we've checked the critical numbers.
Now let's go ahead and check the endpoints.
Those are the point the x values of zero, and four, since our interval is from zero to four.
Plugging in, we get that g of zero is negative one half, and g of four is 320 seconds.
I sometimes like to make a table of all these candidate values.
The candidate x values are 03, and four and the corresponding g of x values we found were negative a half 1/7, and 320 seconds.
Now to find the absolute maximum and minimum values, all I have to do is figure out which one of these y values is the biggest and which is the smallest.
Well, clearly negative one half is a smallest, so that's the absolute minimum value.
And we just need to compare 1/7 and 320 seconds to see which is bigger.
Now, 1/7 is the same as 320 firsts, which is going to be bigger than 320 seconds.
So one half 1/7 is our absolute max value.
We can confirm this by looking at a graph of our function g.
Remember, we're just interested in the interval from zero to four.
So we're just interested in this section of the graph.
And it does look like the minimum value is here at when x equals zero minimum value of negative one half like we found, and the maximum value.
Well, I'm not sure exactly where it is from this graph, but it does look like it's somewhere around three.
And that is a value of something around 1/7.
So the graph does confirm what we found as a more precise answer using calculus.
For the next example, let's find the absolute extreme values for the function f of x, which is the absolute value of x minus x squared, on the interval from negative two to two.
As before, we can find absolute extreme values by checking first the critical numbers, and then also the endpoints of the interval negative two and two.
To find the critical numbers, we need to take the derivative of our function.
But because our function involves the absolute value, it's a little tricky to take the derivative.
Instead, let's first rewrite f using piecewise notation.
Recall that, if we're looking at the absolute value of x, when x is bigger than or equal to zero, absolute value of x is just x.
So f of x will be x minus x squared.
On the other hand, when x is less than zero, the absolute value of x is negative x.
So f of x will be negative x minus x squared.
Now to take the derivative, we can take the derivative of each piece.
So when x is bigger than zero, I don't want to take the derivative when x equals zero, because there might be funny things happening, you know, a cost per corner, so I'm just gonna worry about when x is bigger than zero, and when x is less than zero, for now, when x is bigger than zero, I can just use the power rule I get one minus 2x is the derivative when x is less than zero, I get negative one minus 2x.
And now to find where I have critical numbers, I need to find where f prime of x is equal to zero, or f prime of x does not exist.
Well, f prime of x equals zero, where one minus 2x equals zero for x bigger than zero.
And where one, negative one minus 2x is equal to zero for x less than zero.
So that corresponds to x equal one half for x bigger than zero, and x equals negative one half for x less than zero.
So those are my first two critical numbers.
And that is they do lie within my interval that I'm interested in.
But I also have to worry about where f prime of x does not exist.
And the candidate x value for that is where x equals 01 way to convince ourselves the derivative does not exist when x equals zero is to look at the fact that the derivative is very close to one for x values, very close to zero from the right side and very close to negative one for x values from the left side.
So the graph of the function is going to have to be sloping down with a slope near negative one for x less than zero and up with a slope near one for x greater than zero, and so it'll end up having a cost per corner there.
Also notice that even if I weren't 100% sure that the derivative didn't exist at x equals zero, it's not going to hurt to consider this x equals zero as a possible additional candidate for the absolute max or min value.
So I've got my three critical numbers, and my end points are just going to be x equals negative two and x equals two.
So let me make a chart of values my x values to consider are negative two, negative one half 01, half and positive two, and my corresponding f of x values are going to be, let's say absolute value of negative two minus negative two squared works out to two minus four, which is negative two, I plug in negative one half, I get one half minus 1/4, which is 1/4.
plug in zero, I get zero.
and plugging in one half, I get 1/4.
And plugging in two, I get negative two again.
So now my biggest value is going to be 1/4.
So that's my absolute max value, and my smallest value is going to be negative two.
So that's my absolute min value, I can confirm what I found looking at the graph.
So here I've graphed my function, y equals absolute value of x minus x squared on the interval from negative two to two.
And I can see indeed, that my absolute min is going to be a value of negative two, it occurs at two absolute minimum points, and my absolute maximum is going to be a value of about 1/4.
And that occurs at two absolute maximum points.
And that concludes this video on finding extreme values.
the mean value theorem relates the average rate of change of a function on an interval to its instantaneous rate of change, or derivative.
Let's assume that f is a function defined on a closed interval a, b, and maybe defined in some other places to let's assume that f is continuous on the whole closed interval.
And that is differentiable on the interior of the interval, then the mean value theorem says that there must be some number c in the interval a, b, such that the average rate of change of f on a B is equal to the derivative of f at C.
In symbols, we can write the average rate of change as f of b minus F of A over B minus A.
And that has to equal f prime at C for some number C.
On the graph, the average rate of change of f is the slope of the secant line.
And so the mean value theorem says that there's some number c, somewhere in between a and b, so that the slope of the secant line is exactly the same as the slope of the tangent line at that x value of C.
The number c is not necessarily unique.
So I encourage you to pause the video and see if you can draw a graph of a function where there's more than one c value that works.
So you might have drawn something maybe like this.
Now, if we draw our secant line, there's two values of c, where the slope of the tangent line is equal to the slope of the secant line.
In this example, we're asked to verify the mean value theorem for a particular function on a particular interval.
Verify means that we need to check the hypotheses of the theorem hold.
And also the the conclusion holds.
The hypotheses are that f is continuous on the closed interval, one three, and that is differentiable on that interior of that interval.
Both of these facts are true, because f is a polynomial.
Now we need to verify that the conclusion of the mean value theorem holds.
In other words, we need to find a number c in the interval one, three, such that the derivative of f at C is equal to the average rate of change of f on the interval from one to three.
Now f prime of x is 6x squared minus eight.
So f prime at any number c is just six c squared minus eight.
We can also compute f of three just by plugging in and get 31 and f of one is negative five.
Plugging in these values into our equation, we get that six c squared minus eight has to equal 31 minus negative five over To, in other words, six c squared minus eight had better equal 18, which means that six c squared needs to equal 24.
So C squared has to equal four, which means that C has to equal plus or minus two.
Since negative two is not in the interval from one to three, we're left with a c value of positive two.
So C equals two is the number we're looking for.
And at C equals to f prime is equal to 18, which is the average rate of change of f on the interval.
we've verified the mean value theorem.
In this example, we're told that f of one is seven, and that the derivative of f is bounded between negative three and negative two.
On the interval one six, we're asked to find the biggest and smallest values that f of six could possibly be.
Well, the mean value theorem gives us one way of relating the derivative of the function to its values on the endpoints of the interval.
More specifically, the mean value theorem tells us that the average rate of change F of six minus f of one over six minus one is equal to the derivative f prime of c, for some C, in the interval, one, six.
Since the derivative is bounded between negative three and negative two, we know that the average rate of change is bounded between negative three and negative two.
We know that f of one is seven.
And now we can solve this inequality for f of six.
Multiply the inequality by five and add seven.
And now we can see that negative eight is the smallest possible value for F six and negative three is the largest possible roles, there is an important special case of the mean value theorem.
If f is a function defined on the closed interval a b, and f of x is continuous on that whole closed interval, differentiable on the interior of the interval.
And if f of a is equal to f of b, then there's a number c in the interval a, b, such that f prime of c is zero.
If we look at a graph of such a function that has equal values at a, and at B, we can see where its derivative has to be zero at a maximum, or a minimum in between A and B.
To see why the rolls there is a special case of the mean value theorem.
Think about what the mean value theorem would say about this function, it would say there is a C, such that f prime of c is equal to the average rate of change of the function.
But since f of b and F of A are the same, by our assumption, this average rate of change is just zero.
And so the mean value theorem, its conclusion is that there's a C, such that f prime of c equals zero, which is exactly the conclusion of rules theorem.
In this video, we saw that for a function that's continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that interval, the average rate of change of the function is equal to the instantaneous rate of change of the function, f prime of c for some C in the interval.
This video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals.
the mean value theorem for integrals says that for continuous function f of x, defined on interval from a to b, there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value of f.
The first proof that I'm going to give uses the intermediate value theorem.
Recall that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f defined on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two, if we have some number l in between, f of x one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between x one and x two.
Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now, it's possible that our function f of x might be constant on the interval from a to b.
But if that's true, then our mean value theorem for integrals holds easily, because f AV is just equal to that constant, which is equal to f of c for any c between A and B.
So let's assume that f is not constant, will it continue continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value, which I'll call little m, and big M.
Now, we know that F's average value on the interval has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value.
If you don't believe this, consider the fact that all of F's values on the interval have to lie between big M and little m.
And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a.
Notice that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant.
Now if I divide all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted.
Now, I just need to apply the intermediate value theorem with F's average as my number L and little m and big M as my values of f of x one and f of x two.
The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two.
And therefore, for some C in my interval a b.
And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now I'm going to give a second proof for the mean value theorem for integrals.
And this time, it's going to be as a corollary to the regular mean value theorem for functions.
Recall that the mean value theorem for functions, says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value theorem for integrals.
Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is zero, while g of B is the integral from a to b of our function.
Now, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x.
And by the mean value theorem for functions, we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some numbers, C and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below, we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach.
This shows that the mean value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our function is an integral.
And this completes the second proof of the main value theorem for integrals.
So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different ways.
And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way in this video, We'll solve inequalities involving polynomials like this one, and inequalities involving rational expressions like this one.
Let's start with a simple example, maybe a deceptively simple example, if you see the inequality, x squared is less than four, you might be very tempted to take the square root of both sides and get something like x is less than two as your answer.
But in fact, that doesn't work.
To see why it's not correct, consider the x value of negative 10.
Negative 10 satisfies the inequality, x is less than two, since negative 10 is less than two.
But it doesn't satisfy the inequality x squared is less than four, since negative 10 squared is 100, which is not less than four.
So these two inequalities are not the same.
And it doesn't work to solve a quadratic inequality just to take the square root of both sides, you might be thinking part of why this reasoning is wrong, as we've ignored the negative two option, right?
If we had the equation, x squared equals four, then x equals two would just be one option, x equals negative two would be another solution.
So somehow, our solution to this inequality should take this into account.
In fact, a good way to solve an inequality involving x squares or higher power terms, is to solve the associated equation first.
But before we even do that, I like to pull everything over to one side, so that my inequality has zero on the other side.
So for our equation, I'll subtract four from both sides to get x squared minus four is less than zero.
Now, I'm going to actually solve the associated equation, x squared minus four is equal to zero, I can do this by factoring 2x minus two times x plus two is equal to zero.
And I'll set my factors equal to zero, and I get x equals two and x equals minus two.
Now, I'm going to plot the solutions to my equation on the number line.
So I write down negative two and two, those are the places where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero.
Since I want to find where x squared minus four is less than zero, I want to know whether this expression x squared minus four is positive or negative, a good way to find that out is to plug in test values.
So first, I plug in a test value in this area, the number line, something less than negative two, say x equals negative three.
If I plug in negative three into x squared minus four, I get negative three squared minus four, which is nine minus four, which is five, that's a positive number.
So at negative three, the expression, x squared minus four is positive.
And in fact, everywhere on this region of the number line, my expression is going to be positive, because it can jump from positive to negative, without going through a place where it's zero, I can figure out whether x squared minus four is positive or negative on this region, and on this region of the number line by plugging in test value similar way, evaluate the plug in between negative two and two, a nice value is x equals 00 squared minus four, that's negative four and negative number.
So I know that my expression x squared minus four is negative on this whole interval.
Finally, I can plug in something like x equals 10, something bigger than two, and I get 10 squared minus four.
Without even computing that I can tell that that's going to be a positive number.
And that's all that's important.
Again, since I want x squared minus four to be less than zero, I'm looking for the places on this number line where I'm getting negatives.
So I will share that in on my number line.
It's in here, not including the endpoints, because the endpoints are where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero and I want it strictly less than zero, I can write my answer.
As an inequality, negative two is less than x is less than two, or an interval notation as soft bracket negative two, two soft bracket.
Our next example, we can solve similarly, first, we'll move everything to one side so that our inequality is x cubed minus 5x squared minus 6x is greater than or equal to zero.
Next, we'll solve the associated equation by factoring.
So first, I'll write down the equation.
Now I'll factor out an x.
And now I'll factor the quadratic.
So the solutions to my equation are x equals 0x equals six and x e equals negative one, I'll write the solutions to the equation on the number line.
So that's negative one, zero, and six.
That's where my expression x times x minus six times x plus one is equal to zero.
But I want to find where it's greater than or equal to zero.
So again, I can use test values, I can plug in, for example, x equals negative two, either to this version of expression, or to this factored version.
Since I only care whether my answer is positive or negative, it's sometimes easier to use the factored version.
For example, when x is negative two, this factor is negative.
But this factor, x minus six is also negative when I plug in negative two for x.
Finally, x plus one, when I plug in negative two for x, that's negative one, that's also negative.
And a negative times a negative times a negative gives me a negative number.
If I plug in something between negative one and zero, say x equals negative one half, then I'm going to get a negative for this factor, a negative for this factor, but a positive for this third factor.
Negative times negative times positive gives me a positive for a test value between zero and six, let's try x equals one.
Now I'll get a positive for this factor a negative for this factor, and a positive for this factor.
positive times a negative times a positive gives me a negative.
Finally, for a test value bigger than six, we could use a x equals 100, that's going to give me positive positive positive.
So my product will be positive.
Since I want values where my expression is greater than or equal to zero, I want the places where n equals zero.
And the places where it's positive.
So my final answer will be close bracket negative one to zero, close bracket union, close bracket six to infinity.
As our final example, let's consider the rational inequality, x squared plus 6x plus nine divided by x minus one is less than or equal to zero.
Although it might be tempting to clear the denominator and multiply both sides by x minus one, it's dangerous to do that, because x minus one could be a positive number.
But it could also be a negative number.
And when you multiply both sides by a negative number, you have to reverse the inequality.
Although it's possible to solve the inequality this way, by thinking of cases where x minus one is less than zero or bigger than zero, I think it's much easier just to solve the same way as we did before.
So we'll start by rewriting so that we move all terms to the left and have zero on the right, well, that's already true.
So the next step would be to solve the associated equation.
That is x squared plus 6x plus nine over x minus one is equal to zero.
That would be where the numerators 0x squared plus 6x plus nine is equal to zero, so we're x plus three squared is zero, or x equals negative three, there's one extra step we have to do for rational expressions.
And that's we need to find where the expression does not exist.
That is, let's find where the denominator is zero.
And that said, x equals one.
I'll put all those numbers on the number line, the places where my rational expression is equal to zero, and the place where my rational expression doesn't exist, then I can start in with test values.
For example, x equals minus four, zero and two work.
If I plug those values into this expression here, I get a negative answer, a negative answer and a positive answer.
The reason I need to conclude the values on my number line where my denominator is zero is because I can my expression can switch from negative to positive by passing through a place where my rational expression doesn't exist, as well as passing by passing flew to a place where my rational expression is equal to zero.
Now I'm looking for where my original expression was less than or equal to zero.
So that means I want the places on the number line where my expression is equal to zero, and also the places where it's negative.
So My final answer is x is less than one, or an interval notation, negative infinity to one.
In this video, we solved polynomial and rational inequalities by making a number line.
And using test values to make a sign chart.
The first and second derivative of a function can tell us a lot about the shape of the graph of the function.
In this video, we'll see what f prime and f double prime can tell us about where the function is increasing and decreasing, is concave up and concave down and has inflection points.
We say that a function is increasing.
If f of x one is less than f of x two, whenever x one is less than x two.
In other words, the graph of the function goes up.
As x increases from left to right, we say the function f is decreasing.
If f of x one is greater than f of f two, whenever x one is less than x two.
In other words, the height of the function goes down as we move from left to right.
In this graph, it's a little hard to say what's happening when x is near two, is it completely horizontal, or is the graph slightly increasing?
If we assume it's slightly increasing, then, in this example, f of x is increasing as x ranges from zero to six, and again as x ranges from 10 to 11.
The graph is decreasing for x values between six and 10.
And for x values between 11 and 12, the first derivative of