Linear Approximation.then all other anti derivatives can be written
in the form capital F of x plus C for some constancy. A more rigorous justification of
this fact, can be proved using the mean value theorem, as I'll do in a separate video. If
you know the derivatives for some standard functions, then it's pretty easy to get some
anti derivatives. For example, the antiderivative of one is x. Since the derivative of x is
one, if we want to make that a general antiderivative, we can add a constant C, the antiderivative
of x is x squared over two because when I take the derivative of x squared over two,
the two that I pulled down and multiply cancels with the two in the denominator, leaving me
x. Again, I can make this a more general antiderivative by adding a constant C. More generally, the
antiderivative of x to the n for any and that's not equal to negative one is given by x to
the n plus one divided by n plus one plus a constant C. I can check this by taking the
derivative of x to the n plus one over n plus one. The n here is just a constant. So using
the power rule, I get n plus one times x to the n divided by n plus one that yields x
to the n, which is what I want it. We can think of this rule as the power rule for anti
differentiating since it's closely related to the power rule for differentiating. Now,
this rule doesn't apply when n equals negative one. Notice that we'd be dividing by zero
if n were negative one but we can handle the case when n equals negative one separately,
since x to the negative one is one of our x, we recognize that the antiderivative of
one of our x is just ln of the absolute value of x plus C. Since the derivative of ln of
the absolute value of x is one over x, please pause the video and see how many more anti
derivatives you can fill in in this table. You should get all of these formulas based
on the analogous formulas for differentiating, notice that the antiderivative of sine x is
negative cosine x not cosine x, because the derivative of cosine x is negative sine x.
If I have a constant times x to the n, I'm going to call the constant a instead of C,
since I've already got some C's floating around. If I want the antiderivative of A times x
to the n, that's just going to be a times the antiderivative of x to the n, which is
x to the n plus one over n plus one plus a constant say that's because when I take the
derivative of a constant times a function, I can just pull the constant out. More generally,
the antiderivative of a constant A times any function, little f of x is just going to equal
A times the antiderivative of little f of x, which I'll denote with capital F of X,
plus a constant C. The antiderivative of f of x plus g of x is capital F of X, plus capital
G of x plus c, where capital F and capital G are the antiderivative of lowercase F and
lowercase J. This is because the derivative of a sum is equal to the sum of the derivatives.
Let's use this information to compute the antiderivative for f of x equals five over
one plus x squared minus one over two times the square root of x. First, I'm going to
rewrite f of x as five times one over one plus x squared minus one half times x to the
minus one half. I know that the antiderivative of one over one plus x squared is arctangent
of x. And by the power rule for anti differentiating the antiderivative of x to the minus one half,
I get by raising the exponent by one, negative one half plus one is positive one half, and
then dividing by the new exponent by my constant multiplication rules, I can just multiply
by my constants. And that's my antiderivative capital F of X, I've have to remember the
plus C for the general antiderivative, I can simplify a little bit by canceling these one
halves. And I get a final answer of five times arc tan of x minus a squared of x plus C.
In this video, we introduced anti derivatives and build a table of anti derivatives based
on our knowledge of derivatives. In this video, we'll solve problems where we're given an
equation for the derivative of the function. And we're given an initial condition, something
like f of one equals seven. And we have to find the function f of x. In this first example,
suppose g prime of x is e to the x minus three times sine x. and g of two pi is five, we
need to find g of x. Well, g of x is an antiderivative of e to the x minus three sine x. So g of
x is of the form e to the x plus three cosine of x plus a constant C. That's because the
derivative of e to the x is e to the x, the derivative of cosine x is minus sine x, and
the derivative of a constant is just zero. Now I need to find the value of the constant
C that makes this initial condition come true. If I plug in two pi for x, I get e to the
two pi plus three times cosine of two pi plus C, and that needs to equal five. Since cosine
of two pi is one, I have that e to the two pi plus three plus c equals five. And so C
is equal to two minus e to the two pi. So my function g of x is equal to either the
x plus three cosine x Plus two minus e to the two pi. In this example, we're given the
second derivative of f. And we're given two initial conditions, f of one is zero, and
f of zero is two. To start, I'm going to rewrite f double prime
of x in a more manageable form. by distributing, I get the square root of x times x minus the
square root of x over x. and rewriting with exponents, we get x to the three halves minus
x to the minus one half. Next, I'm going to find f prime of x, which is the antiderivative
of f double prime of x. So f prime of x, using the power rule for anti derivatives, I raised
the exponent of three halves by one to get five halves, and then divide by the new exponent
five halves. Similarly, I raised negative one half by one to get one half and divide
by the new exponent one half. And I'll add on a constant see, let me simplify a little
here, instead of dividing by five halves, multiply by two fifths, and instead of dividing
by one half, multiply by two. Now I've got an expression for f prime of x, but I need
an expression for f of x, which is the antiderivative of f prime, and so all anti differentiate
again. So now I have two fifths times x to the seven halves over seven halves minus two
times x to the three halves over three halves, the antiderivative of a constant C is C times
x, and then I'll add on a new constant D. After simplifying a bit, I'm ready to use
my initial conditions, in order to solve for my constant C and D. When I plug in zero for
x, all my x terms vanish, I'm just left with D, so d has to equal two. So I can rewrite
my function, setting D equal to two. And now my second condition says that f of one equals
zero. So plugging in one for x, I get 430 fifths minus four thirds plus c plus two,
and that has to equal zero, which means that c is negative two, minus 430 fifths, plus
four thirds, which simplifies to minus 80 to 100, and fifths. If we plug that in for
C, we get a final answer for f of x. And that finishes the problem. In this final example,
we're not given any equations, so we have to make them up ourself, we're told that we're
standing at the edge of a cliff, at height 30 meters, with throw a tomato up in the air
at an initial velocity of 20 meters per second. The tomato then falls down to the ground due
to gravity. And we want to find how long that takes and what its velocity is at impact.
We know that the acceleration due to gravity is negative 9.8 meters per second squared.
If we're working in metric units. The similar figure if we're working in units of feet,
is negative 32 feet per second squared. The negative sign is because gravity is pulling
objects down towards the ground in the negative direction. We're also given the initial condition,
that velocity at time zero is 20 meters per second. That's a positive velocity because
we're throwing the tomato up. And we're told that the initial position s of zero is 30
meters. So let's start with the equation that acceleration is negative 9.8. In other words,
S double prime of t is negative 9.8. Therefore, S prime of t is negative 9.8 t plus a constant
c one. And from my initial condition about velocity, I know that s prime of zero is 20.
So in other words, S prime of zero is negative 9.8 times zero plus c one that has to equal
20. Which means that c one is equal to 20. Substituting in 20 for C one, I can rewrite
s prime of t Now I can find f of t, the antiderivative of S prime. And that's going to be negative
9.8 times t squared over two plus 20 t plus a second constant C two. Using my second initial condition, f of zero
equals 30. I can plug in zero for t, and get an expression that equals 30. Since all the
terms drop out, besides the C two, that tells me that C two is 30. And so I can find my
equation position by substituting 34 c two. Now I want to find out how long it takes the
tomato to hit the ground. So that's going to be the time when s of t equals zero. Setting
zero equal to my expression for S of t, I can use the quadratic formula to solve for
t, and I get t equals approximately negative 1.17, or 5.25. The negative time doesn't make
sense for the problem. So I'm left with a time of impact of 5.25 seconds. Now to find
the velocity of the impact, I need to plug that time into my velocity equation. In other
words, my equation for S prime. So s prime of 5.25, is 9.8 times 5.25, plus 20, which
simplifies to negative 31.45 meters per second, probably enough to squash the tomato. And
that's all for this video on finding anti derivatives using initial conditions. In this
video, I'll use the mean value theorem to show that the antiderivative zero has to be
a constant. And then any two anti derivatives of the same function have to differ by a constant.
In a previous video, I stated the fact that if f of x is one antiderivative of a function,
little f of x, than any other antiderivative of that same function can be written in the
form capital F of x plus C for some constant C. In other words, any two antiderivative
of the same function have to differ by a constant. To prove this fact, let's first note that
if the derivative of a function, g prime of x is equal to zero on an interval than the
original function, g of x must equal C for some constant C. This statement follows from
the mean value theorem, because the mean value theorem tells us that for any x one and x
two in our interval, the average rate of change between x one and x two is equal to the derivative
at some number x three in between x one and x two. But by assumption, g prime is zero
everywhere on the interval, so g prime of x three must be equal to zero. This means
that our numerator, g of x want to minus g of x one has to equal zero. In other words,
g of x two is equal to g of x one, but that's true for any x one and x two. So all the values
of G are equal, and G must be a constant. The second observation that I want to make
is that if G one and G two are two functions, which have the same derivative, then g one
of x must equal g two of x plus C for some constant C. This statement follows from the
previous statement, because if G one prime of x is equal to g two prime of x, then g
one prime of x minus g two prime of x must equal zero. But that means if I look at the
function g one of x minus g two of x, and take its derivative, that has to equal zero,
since the derivative The difference is the difference of the derivatives. Now our previous
statement tells us that if the derivative of a function is zero, the function must be
a constant, and therefore, g one of x minus g two of x equals C for some constant C, which
means that g one of x is equal to g two of x plus C, which is what we wanted to prove.
So we've proved that any two functions with the same derivative have to differ by a constant
or in other words, If capital F of X is one antiderivative of a function than any other
antiderivative must be of the form capital F of x plus C. This concludes the proof that
any two anti derivatives of a particular function must differ by a constant. This video will
review summation notation, that is, the sigma notation used to write a song. In this expression, using the greek capital
letter sigma, the letter I is called the index. The number one is called the lower limit of
summation, or the starting index. And the number five is called the upper limit of summation,
or the ending index, we evaluate this expression by summing up to the I, for all values of
i starting from one and ending at five and stepping through the integers. In other words,
we start with i equals one and take two to the one. And then we add to it two to the
two, two to the Three, two to the four, and two to the five. If we do the arithmetic,
this comes out to 62. In the second expression, our index is J, and we start with J equals
three and go up to J equals seven, once again, stepping through integer values. So we have
to add up 1/3 plus 1/4, plus 1/5, plus one, six, and then our last term is one seven.
This sum is equal to 153, over 140. When we're given a psalm like this one, it can be handy
to write it in sigma notation, because it's more compact. But to do so, we have to look
for the pattern between the terms. In this case, the terms all differ by three. So I
can think of nine as being six plus three, and 12, as being six plus twice, three, and
15 as being six plus three times three, and so on. In fact, we can even think of six itself
as being six plus zero times three to fit this pattern. Now we can write the sum as
sigma of six plus i times three, where I ranges from zero to four. Here, we're thinking of
six plus three as six plus one times three. Now, there are other ways to write this sum
and sigma notation. For example, we could notice that each of the terms is a multiple
of three. And in fact, six is three times two, nine is three times three, and so on.
And so we could write our sum as sigma of three times n, where n ranges from two to
six. The choice of the letter we use for the index doesn't matter at all. For example,
we could also write this as sigma from K equals two to six of three times k. Here, k and n
play the same role. Please pause the video for a moment and try to write this next example
in sigma notation. Since the denominators are powers of two, we could write the denominators
as two to the i, where i ranges from two to five. The numerators are one less than the
denominators, so we can write the numerators as two to the i minus one was we're adding
these terms up, we write sigma, and we I go from two to five. In this video, we reviewed
summation notation, or sigma notation for writing sums. In this video, we'll approximate
the area under a curve using tall skinny rectangles, this will introduce the idea of an integral.
Let's start by approximating the area under this curve y equals x squared in between x
equals zero, and x equals three by approximating it with six rectangles. There's several ways to do this. For example,
I could draw rectangles for the right side of each rectangle is as tall as the curve.
We'll call this using write endpoints. Alternatively, we could line up our rectangles, so the left
side of each rectangle is as high as the curve. We'll call this use Left endpoints. Notice
that the leftmost rectangle in this picture is degenerate and has height zero. If we're
using the picture with the right endpoints, then the base of each rectangle has size one
half. And the height of each rectangle is given by the value of our function, y equals
x squared on the right side of the rectangle. So for example, the area of the first rectangle
is its base times its height, which is point five times 0.5 squared. The 0.5 squared comes
from me evaluating the function at this point 0.5 to get the height. Similarly, the area
of the second rectangle is going to be also base times height basis, still point five,
and now the height is going to be one squared, or one. If we continue like this, and add
up all our areas, we get the area of all six rectangles is given by this expression. Notice
that there are six terms here, one for each rectangle, each rectangle has base of point
five, and has height given by the right endpoint, we can write this in sigma notation as the
sum of 0.5 times 0.5 times i squared, where I ranges from one to six. This works because
the numbers in parentheses here are all multiples of point five. The first one is point five
times one, and the last one, three is point five times six. Now if we compute the sum,
we get 91 eighths, which is 11.375. Notice from the picture, that the sum of areas of
rectangles is an over estimate for the area under the curve, we can do the same sort of
computation for this green picture using left endpoints, and we'll get an under estimate
for the area under the curve, I invite you to try it for yourself before going on with
the video. For the green rectangles, the first rectangle has area zero, the second rectangle
has area given by its base of 0.5 times its height of 0.5 squared. And if we compute all
six areas and add them up, we get a similar expression to the previous one, only this
time, we end with a 2.5 squared, which is the height of our last rectangle. One way
to write this in sigma notation, is still starting with i equals one for the first rectangle
to six for the last one, we use the base. And then for the height, we use 0.5 times
I minus one, squared. This works because when I is one, i minus
one is zero, so we start with a height of zero like we should. And when I is six, we
get point five times six minus one, which is point five times five, or 2.5, just like
we want it to be, if we add up the sum, we get an answer of 55 eighths, which is equal
to 6.875, which is an underestimate for the true area under the curve. Now there's a big
gap between 6.875 and 11.375. So it'd be nice to get tighter bounds on the area. One way
to do this is by using more rectangles, for example, 12 rectangles instead of six. Again,
we could choose to use right endpoints, which gives us an over estimate of area in this
case, or we could use left endpoints, which gives us an under estimate. The area of the
eyes rectangle is given by the base times the height, and the base is going to be in
this case 0.25. While the height is given by the functions value on the right endpoint,
the right endpoint of the eyes rectangle is going to be 0.25 times I and the function
is the squaring function. So that height will be given by point two, five i squared. The
area of all the rectangles can then be given by the sum from i equals one to 12 for the
12 rectangles of 0.25 times 0.25 i squared. If we work out that sum, it comes to 10.156.
Again, we can do the same thing with left endpoints. Now the area of the eye, the rectangle,
is given by base times height, which is point two, five. And now the height is given by
the value of the function on the left endpoint. So that's going to be 0.25 times I minus one.
And we need to square that, since our function y equals x squared is giving the height of
my rectangles. So the area of all the rectangles together is going to be the sum from the first
rectangle to the 12th rectangle of 0.25 times 0.25, times I minus one squared. That works out to 7.906. So we're honing in
on the actual area under the curve. Now it's somewhere between about eight and about 10,
we can keep getting better and better estimates of area by using more and more rectangles.
For example, if we want to use 100 rectangles, then our area of all rectangles using right
endpoints is going to be given by the sum from i equals one to 100 of the basis times
the heights. Now the base of each rectangle will be 100 of the length here from zero to
three. In other words, the base will be three over 100. The eyes right endpoint, which I'll
call X sub i, is going to be just three over 100 times I, since you get to the right eye
threat endpoint by taking I copies of a rectangle of width three one hundredths. Therefore,
the eyes height is going to be given by this is right endpoint squared, or three one hundredths
times i squared. So we can write our sum of areas as sigma from i equals one to 100 of
three one hundredths times three one hundredths times i squared. The formula using left endpoints
is similar. The if left endpoint is going to be three one hundredths, times I minus
one, since if we're using left endpoints, we only have to travel through i minus one
rectangles to get to the left endpoint of the rectangle. So our area for the left endpoints
becomes the sum from i equals one to 100 of three over 100 times three over 100 times
I minus one squared. These two psalms work out to be 9.1435 and 8.8654. At this point,
you might be willing to wager a guess that our exact area under the curve is probably
going to be nine. But to determine the exact area for sure, let's do this process of dividing
into rectangles one more time. And this time, we'll just use an rectangles where n is some
big number. Since we're dividing an interval of length three into n little pieces, the
width of each sub interval, in other words, the base of each rectangle, we'll be given
by three over n. I'll call this delta x as a little tiny bit of x. Now the right endpoint,
x by is given by three over n times i. Since we have to travel through I rectangles, each
of width three over n on order to get to that right endpoint. So our height, H sub i is
given by the functions value on that right endpoint. We can work out similar expressions
for the picture using left endpoints here. Our estimate of area using right endpoints
is then the sum from i equals one to n of three over n times three I over n squared.
And our estimate using left endpoints is a sum from i equals one to n of three over n
times three, i minus one over n squared, the more rectangles we use, in other words, the
bigger the value of n, the closer our estimated area will be to our exact area under the curve.
And therefore, the exact area is given by the limit the limit as n goes to infinity
of this song, which is known as a Riemann sum, there are really two possible limits, we could
use right endpoints or left endpoints. But as the picture suggests, these two limits
should turn out to be the same thing. In fact, there are other options between sides using
right endpoints and left endpoints, we could, for example, use the midpoints of our intervals
to compute our areas of rectangles. And that limit should also end up as the same thing.
So we have an expression for the area under the curve y equals x squared between the values of x equals one and x equals three.
And that's given by the limit of this psalm called a Riemann sum. I'll stick with the
right endpoint version for now, to compute the exact area, we have to evaluate this limit,
which is tricky. I'm going to start by rewriting. Since three and n don't involve the index
I, I can pull them outside of this summation sign. I'll clean this up a little bit. Now
will you need to use the fact that the sum of the first n squares of the integers is
equal to n times n plus one times two n plus one over six, we can check that formula for a few values
of n. For example, if n equals two, we're summing out one squared plus two squared,
which is five. And we're plugging in two times two plus one times four plus one over six
from the formula, which also equals five. If we use this formula, in our limit calculation,
we get this expression, which simplifies to nine halves, by dividing 27 by six, we can
cancel a copy of n and get n plus one times two n plus one over n squared. I'm going to
pull out the nine halves. And now I observe I have the limit of a rational expression,
where the highest power term on the numerator is going to be two n squared, the highest
power and there's nominators just the n squared, so that's going to be a limit of two, multiply
that by by nine halves, and I get a limit of nine, just like I expected from the previous
work. So that was a big production. But we did successfully find the area under the curve,
and it was nine. In this video, we approximated the area under a curve by taking the limit
as the number of rectangles goes to infinity of the area of the rectangles, which is given
by a psalm called a Riemann sum of the basis times the heights of the rectangles. The basis
are often written as delta x, and the heights are given by the function value on the left
endpoint, or the right endpoint, or some other point in the interval. For our purposes, f
was always x squared. But this sort of expression, called a Riemann sum, can be used more generally,
to evaluate the area under any continuous function. In previous sections, we thought
of the definite integral as representing area, and we've computed it as a number. In this
section, we'll think of the integral itself as a function of the bounds of integration.
And we'll describe the first part of the fundamental theorem relating the derivative and the integral.
Suppose f of x has the graph shown here, and let g of x be the integral from one to x of
f of t dt. I'm using t as my variable inside my integrand Here, just to distinguish it
from the variable x that I'm using in my bounds of integration, this expression just means
the net area between one and some value x on the x axis. I'll call geovax, the accumulated
area function, because as x increases, g of x, measures how much net area has accumulated.
Let's calculate and plot some values of g of x. g of one is the integral from one to
one of f of t, dt, that's just zero. Since the bounds of integration here the same, g
of two is the integral from one to two of f of t, dt. That's the net area from one to
two, which is to square units. g of three is the integral from one to three. Now, we've
added on an additional two units here, and an additional one unit up here from this triangle,
for a total of five, g of four is g of three with some additional area tacked on the additional area measures three units. So g of four is
eight. Please pause the video and fill in the next few values of J. When we go from g of four to g of five, we
add on an extra unit of area. So g of five is nine. As we go from g of five to g of six,
we start accumulating negative area, because f is now below the x axis. So here I've accumulated
one unit of negative area, which means that g of six is one less than g of five. In other
words, gf six is eight, g of seven is five. Since we accumulate three more units of negative
area, to find g of zero, the integral from one to zero of f of t dt, I'm going to rewrite
this integral as negative the integral from zero to one of f of t dt. Since there are
two units of area between zero and one, g of zero is negative to apply all these values
of G on these coordinate axes, and connect the dots to get an idea of what g of x looks
like. Now let's think about the derivative g prime of x. We know that g prime of x is
positive, where g of x is increasing, but g of x is increasing, wherever we're adding
on positive area, that is when f of x is positive. So we have that g prime of x is positive,
where f is x is positive. Also, g prime of x is negative, where g of x is
decreasing. That happens when we're adding on negative area because f of x is negative.
So we can see that g prime of x is negative, where f of x is negative. Also, g prime is
zero at this local maximum, where f is zero. At that instant, we're not adding on any positive
or negative area. If we look a little closer, we can see the
rate at which g of x is increasing depends on the height of f of x. When f of x is tall,
or high, we're adding on area very quickly. While when f of x is low or small, we're adding
on area more slowly. So the rate of change of G. In other words, g prime of x is behaving
very much like the function f of x itself. And in fact, it turns out that g prime of
x is equal to f of x. This is the first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus Part One
says that of f of x is a continuous function on the closed interval from a to b, then for
any x in this interval, the function g of x, the integral from a to x of f of t dt is
continuous on the interval a b and differentiable on the inside of this interval, and for Furthermore,
g prime of x is equal to f of x, as we saw in the previous example. The proof of this
fact relies on a limit definition of derivative, and can be found in a later video. For now,
let's do some examples based on this fact. First, let's find the derivative with respect
to x of the integral from five to x of the square root of t squared plus three dt. The
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus tells us that this expression here thought of as a function
of x is differentiable, and its derivative is just the integrand function evaluated on
x. This is great, we don't have to do any work here at all. To evaluate the derivative,
we just plug in x, where we see the T here, the derivative and the second expression is
also the square root of x squared plus three, it might seem odd that these two expressions
have the same derivative. But remember, in both cases, we're taking the derivative of
the accumulated area function. And the rate at which area accumulates doesn't depend on
the lower bound of the integral. That is, it doesn't depend on where we start counting,
it just depends on the height of the function at x. For this third example, remember that the
integral from x to four is the same thing as the negative of the integral from four
to x. So we get the negative of the derivative from four to x. and applying the fundamental
theorem of calculus, this lesson is negative the square root of x squared plus three, it
makes sense that we should get a negative answer for this example. When we're integrating
from X to four, then as x increases, our area actually decreases. So our accumulated area
function should have a negative derivative. This last example is more complicated, because
instead of just having x as our upper bound, we have a function of x sine of x, we can
think of sine of x as being the inside function, and the accumulated area function as being
an outside function and apply the chain rule. In general, the chain rule says that we have
the derivative with respect to x of a function of u of x, then that's the same thing as the
derivative with respect to u of that function at U times the derivative of the inside function
u of x with respect to x, applying the chain rule to our accumulated area function, where
you have x is sine x, we have that the derivative respect to x of the integral from four to
sine x of the integral of t squared plus three DT can be written as the derivative by two
you, I've accumulated area function from four to you have the integrand times the derivative
with respect to x of our u of x, which is just sine x, we can apply the fundamental
theorem of calculus to calculate the first derivative. By just plugging in you for T,
we get you squared plus three. And then the derivative of sine x, of course, is just cosine
of x. Since we want our final answer to be entirely in terms of x, we're going to rewrite
this as the square root of sine x squared plus three times cosine x, or just the square
root of sine squared x plus three times cosine of x. We could have gotten this answer more
quickly by just plugging in this entire expression sine of x in where we saw the T here in the
integrand, and then multiplying the answer by the derivative of sine x due to the chain
rule. This video introduced the fundamental theorem
of calculus part one that says that the derivative of the integral of a function is just the
original function in some sense, taking the derivative and does the process of taking
the integral. derivatives and integrals are closely related. inverse operations. This
video introduces the second part of the fundamental theorem of calculus. Another way of relating
derivatives and integrals. Part Two of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that
if f is a continuous function on the closed interval a b, then the integral from a to
b of f of x dx is equal to capital F of b minus capital F of A, where capital F is any
antiderivative for lowercase F. That is, capital F is a function whose derivative is lowercase
F. The proof of part two of the fundamental theorem of calculus follows directly from
part one. And I'll give that proof in another video. But here, I just want to make a few
comments about what this theorem means. If we think of f of x as the derivative of capital
F of x, then this is saying that the integral of the derivative is equal to the original
function evaluated on the endpoints. I also want to comment on the phrasing any antiderivative.
Suppose capital G of X is a different antiderivative for lowercase F. We know that any two anti
derivatives differ by a constant. So we know that g of x has to equal capital F of X plus
some constant. So if we take g of b minus g of a, that's going to be the same thing
as f of b plus c minus f of a plus C. And since this constant sees subtract out to cancel
here, this is just f of b minus f of a. So this difference is the same value, no matter
which antiderivative of lowercase f we use. And that's why we can say that capital F can
be any antiderivative. Part Two of the fundamental theorem of calculus is super useful, because
it allows us to compute integrals simply by finding anti derivatives and evaluating them.
Finding anti derivatives tends to be really easy. Computing integrals, using the Riemann
sum definition is really hard. And so because of the fundamental theorem of calculus, we
don't have to go through all those lengthy and tedious computations, we've involving
limits of areas of rectangles, all we have to do to evaluate an integral is find an antiderivative,
and evaluate it. Let's see how this works in some examples. In this first example, the
antiderivative of 3x squared is x cubed. And the antiderivative of negative four over x
is minus four times ln absolute value of x. We could add a plus C to make it a general
antiderivative, but we don't really need it. The fundamental theorem says that we can use
any antiderivative, so we might as well use the simplest one, where c equals zero. Now
we need to evaluate this antiderivative on the endpoints of negative one and negative
five. And we usually write this as a vertical line with a negative one at the bottom and
a negative five at the top to mean evaluation. In other words, the notation capital F of X between A and B means capital F of b minus
capital F of A, which is what we need to compute for our antiderivative here. So now we just
plug in negative five for x, and then we subtract what we get when we plug in negative one for
x. In this example, you can see why it's important to write the antiderivative of one over x
as ln absolute value of x not just ln of x, because ln of the absolute value of five,
which is ln a five actually has an answer, whereas ln of negative five would not exist.
I can simplify this expression a little bit, I get negative 125 minus four ln five minus
negative one, plus four ln of one. Since ln of one is zero, this becomes negative 124
minus four ln five. That's about negative 130 point 438. In this next example, we need
to find the antiderivative for this expression y squared minus y plus one over the square
root Why. Now we can't take the antiderivative separately of the numerator and the denominator,
because that's just not how the quotient rule works for differentiation. So it doesn't work
that way for anti differentiation either. Instead, let's try to simplify this expression
to make it look more like something we can take the antiderivative of. So I'm going to
rewrite the denominator as y to the one half power. And dividing by y to the one half is
the same thing as multiplying by y to the negative one half distributed, distributing
and adding exponents, I get y to the three halves minus y to the one half plus y to the
negative one half. Now that's something I can take the antiderivative of just using
the power rule and reverse y to the three halves, becomes y to the five halves by adding
one to the exponent, I divide by the new exponent. Now here, I get y to the three halves divided
by three halves, and here are negative one half plus one is positive one half, I need
to evaluate this between four and one. let me simplify a little bit. And now I'll substitute
in values. Now four to the five halves is the same thing as four to the one half raised
to the fifth power. So that's two to the fifth power, or 32. Similarly, for the three halves
is four to the one half cubed, so that's two cubed, or eight, and four to the one half
is just two. And one to any power is just one. And after some arithmetic, I get an answer
of 146 15th. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, part
two can be stated this way, for a function capital F with continuous derivative, the
integral of the derivative is equal to the original function evaluated on the bounds
of integration. In this video, I'll prove both parts of the fundamental theorem of calculus.
The first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that if f of x is a continuous
function, then the function g of x defined as the integral from a constant A to the variable
x of f of t dt is differentiable, and has derivative equal to the original function, f of x. To prove this theorem, let's start with the
limit definition of derivative. The derivative, g prime of x, by definition, is the limit
as h goes to zero of g of x plus h minus g of x over h. Now g of x is defined as an integral
from a to x. So g of x plus h is going to be the integral from a to x plus h, just plugging
in x plus h for x of f of t dt. g of x is the integral from a to x of f of t dt. By properties of integrals. The integral from
a to x plus h minus the integral from a to x is just the integral from x to x plus h.
Now informally, the integral from x to x plus h can be closely approximated by a skinny
rectangle with height, f of x and width, H. And so this limit is approximately the limit
as h goes to zero of f of x times h over h, which is just f of x. But let's make this
argument a little more precise. Let's let capital M be the maximum value that f of x
achieves on this little sub interval, and lowercase m be the minimum value achieved.
In this picture, they occur on the endpoints of the interval from x to x plus h, but they
could also occur somewhere in the interior. But we know that f of x does have to have
a minimum value and a maximum value, since it's a continuous function by assumption on
a closed interval. Now we know that the integral of f of t dt from x to x plus h has to be
less than or equal to capital M times h and bigger than a to lowercase m times h. This
is one of the properties of integrals, and can be verified visually by comparing this
shaded red area to the small blue rectangle, which has area lowercase m times h, and comparing
it to the area of the big rectangle, which has area capital M times h equivalently, the
integral from x to x plus H of F of t dt divided by h has to be less than or equal to capital
M and greater than or equal to little m. But the intermediate value theorem, which holds
for all continuous functions, says that this intermediate value that lies between the minimum
and maximum value of f has to be achieved as f of c for some C in the interval. Therefore,
I cannot replace this integral in the limit expression above by just simply the value
f of c for some c between x and x plus h. The value of C here depends on x and h. But
as h goes to zero, C has to get closer and closer to x. And since f is continuous, this
means that this limit is equal to f of x. We've now proved the first part of the fundamental
theorem of calculus, that the derivative of g exists and equals f of x. The second part
of the fundamental theorem of calculus says that if f is continuous, then the integral
from a to b of f of x dx is equal to the antiderivative of lowercase F, which I'll denote by capital
F, evaluated at B minus that antiderivative evaluated today. Part Two of the fundamental
theorem follows directly from part one. Let's let g of x be defined as the integral from
a to x of f of t dt. Then part one of the fundamental theorem of calculus tells us that
g prime of x exists and equals lowercase f of x. In other words, capital G is an antiderivative
for a lowercase F. Now g of the minus g of A is by definition, the integral from a to
b of f of t dt minus the integral of a from a to a of f of t dt. The second integral is
zero, since the bounds of integration are identical. So part two of the fundamental
theorem of calculus is true if I use the antiderivative capital G. But the theorem is supposed to be true for
any antiderivative. So let's let capital F be any antiderivative of lowercase F, we know
that capital F of x has to equal capital G of X plus some constant since any two antiderivative
for the same function differ by a constant, and therefore, capital F of b minus capital
F of A is going to equal capital G of B plus C minus capital G of A plus C. The constant
C cancels out, and we just get capital G of b minus capital G of A, which we already saw
was equal to the integral from a to b of lowercase f of t dt. So the left side of this equation
is equal to the right side. And the fundamental theorem of calculus Part two is proved for
any antiderivative. This completes the proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus. This
video is about the substitution method for evaluating integrals, also known as u substitution.
As the first example, let's try to integrate to x sine of x squared dx. Now sine of x squared
is the composition of the function sine and the function x squared. And notice that the
function x squared has derivative to x, which is sitting right here and the integrand. I'm
going to make the substitution u equals x squared, and then I'll write d u is equal
to 2x dx. That's differential notation. To find d u, I take the derivative have X squared
and then multiply by the differential dx, I can then rewrite the integrand as sine of
u. And the 2x. dx becomes do after making this substitution, I can integrate, because
the antiderivative of sine of u is negative cosine of u. And I'll add on the constant
of integration. I'm not finished yet, my original problem was in terms of x, and now I've got
a function in terms of u. So let's substitute back in since u is equal to x squared, I can
replace that, and I have my final answer. To verify that this final answer is correct,
that it really is the antiderivative of what we started with, let's take the derivative
of our answer and make sure we get back the function to x sine of x squared. If we take the derivative of negative cosine
of x squared plus C, then we get the derivative of a constant is zero, so we have the derivative
of negative cosine, that's equal to sine of the inside function x squared times the derivative
of the inside function using the chain rule. And we do in fact, get back to the integrand
that we started with. Notice that we use the chain rule when taking the derivative to check
our answer. Let's try some more examples of use substitution. When looking for what to
substitute as you, it's good to look for a chunk that's in the integrand, whose derivative
is also in the integrand. It's also good enough to just have a constant multiple of the derivative
in the integrand. So in the first example, we might use the chunk one plus 3x squared,
as are you. The derivative of that expression is six times x. And even though six times
x isn't completely in the integrand, we do have a factor of x in the numerator, that's
just a constant multiple away from the derivative of 6x. So let's write out d u, that's going
to be 6x dx. And I'm going to go ahead and rewrite this as x dx is equal to one six d
U. writing it this way, it makes it easy to substitute one six d u for x dx. And then
in my denominator, my one plus 3x squared becomes u. I can rewrite this as one six times
the integral of one over u d u you and I recognize that the antiderivative of one over u is ln
absolute value of u. Substituting back in for you, I get a final answer of one six ln
absolute value of one plus 3x squared, plus say, the absolute value signs are not really
necessary in this example, since one plus 3x squared is always positive. As our next
example, let's look at the integral of e to the 7x dx. one chunk with us here is u equals
7x. If we do that, then d u is just seven dx. And so we have dx is equal to 1/7 do substituting
in we have the integral of e to the u times 1/7 d u, I can pull the 1/7 out and integrate
e to the u to the app, just either the U and substituting in for back for 7x, I get e to
the 7x plus C. I encourage you to pause the video to check that these two answers are
correct. By taking derivatives. You'll notice that you use the chain rule each time. Next,
let's do an example with a definite integral, the integral from E to E squared of ln x over
x dx. If we set u equal to ln x, then d u is the derivative of ln x, that's one of our
x times dx. This is a much better choice of you than say setting u equal to x from the
denominator, because then d u would just be dx. And when we did the substitution, nothing
would really change. For definite integrals, we need to deal with the bounds of integration
here e and d squared. We really have two options, worry about them now or worry about them later.
I'll show you the worry about them. Now method first. Our bounds of integration E and E squared
are values of Bax as we convert everything in our integral from x to you, we need to
convert the bounds of integration from values of x to values of u also. Now, when x is equal
to e, u is equal to ln IV, which is one, just using this equation. Similarly, when x is
equal to E squared, u is equal to ln t squared, which is two. So as I rewrite my integral,
I'm going to replace the bounds with one and two. And now my ln x becomes my u and my dx
divided by x becomes my do, they're going to grow of UD u is equal to use squared over
two, and I evaluate this between the bounds of u equals two and u equals one to get two
squared over two minus one squared over two, which is one half. Notice that when we did
the problem this way, we never actually had to get back to our variable x, we stayed in
the variable u and evaluated. The second way of dealing with the bounds of integration
is to worry about them later. Let's go back to the beginning of the problem. We're just
about to substitute u equals ln x and d u equals one over x dx. Instead of substituting
in for the bounds of integration, I'm going to temporarily ignore them and just evaluate
the indefinite integral ln x over x dx, which I can substitute in as you times do, we can
evaluate that to get you squared over two. Normally we'd have a plus c constant. But
since we're ultimately going to be doing a definite integral, we don't really need the
constant here. Now, just like when we're doing indefinite integrals, I'm going to get back
to the variable x by substituting back in for you U is ln of x. So I square that and
divided by two, and then I can go back to my original bounds of integration, those bounds
are the x values of E squared, and E. Plugging in those bounds, I get ln of E squared quantity
squared over two minus ln of E squared over two, which evaluates to two squared over two
minus one over two, which is again, one half. This video gave some examples of use substitution
to evaluate integrals. This method works great in examples like this one, where there's a
chunk that you can call you whose derivative or at least a constant multiple of its derivative
is also in the integrand. You've already seen how u substitution works
in practice. In this video, I'll try to explain why it works. u substitution is based on the
chain rule. Recall the chain rule says if we take the derivative of a function, capital
F of lowercase g of x with respect to x, we get the derivative of capital F evaluated
on the inside function g of x times the derivative of g of x. If we just write that equation in the opposite
order, we have that an expression of the form f prime of g of x times g prime of x can all
be wrapped up as the derivative of a composite function, f of g of x. Now if I take the integral
of both sides of this equation with respect to x, on the right side, I'm taking the integral of a derivative. Well, the integral or antiderivative of a
derivative is just the original function, capital f of g of x plus C. Now when we do
use substitution, we're really just writing this equation down. We are seeing an expression
of the form f prime of g of x times g prime of x dx, we're recognizing you as g of x and
d u as g prime of x dx. So we're rewriting this expression as the integral of capital
F prime of u d u do and that integrates to just capital F of u plus C. And then we're
substituting back in for you To get capital f of g of x plus C, the beginning and end
of this process are exactly the same as the left side and right side of our chain rule
expression above. So when you're doing u substitution to integrate, you can thank this chain rule
that's behind it all. This video introduces the idea of an average value of a function.
To take the average of a finite list of numbers, we just add the numbers up and divide by n,
the number of numbers. In summation notation, we write the sum from i equals one to n of
Q i all divided by n. But defining the average value of a continuous function is a little
different. Because a function can take on infinitely many values on an interval from
a to b, we could estimate the average value of the function by sampling it at a finite
Li many evenly spaced x values. I'll call them x one through x n. And let's assume that
they're spaced a distance of delta x apart, then the average value of f at these sample
points is just the sum of the values of f divided by n, the number of values are in
summation notation, the sum from i equals one to n of f of x i all divided by n. This
is an approximate average value of f, since we're just using n sample points. But the
approximation gets better as the number of sample points n gets bigger and bigger. So
we could define the average as the limit as n goes to infinity of the sample average.
I'd like to make this look more like a Riemann sum. So I need to get delta x in there. So
I'm just going to multiply the top and the bottom by delta x. And notice that n times
delta x is just the length of the interval b minus a. Now as the number of sample points
goes to infinity, delta x, the distance between them goes to zero. So I can rewrite my limit
as the limit as delta x goes to zero, of the sum of FX II times delta x divided by b minus
a. Now the limit of this Riemann sum in the numerator is just the integral from a to b
of f of x dx. And so the average value of the function is given by the integral on the
interval from a to b divided by the length of the interval. Notice the similarity between
the formula for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a
list of numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the
list of numbers. And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to
n, the number of numbers in the list of numbers. Now let's work an example. For the function
g of x equals one over one minus 5x. On the interval from two to five, we know that the
average value of G is given by the integral from two to five of one over one minus 5x
dx divided by the length of that interval, I'm going to use use of the tuition to integrate,
so I'm going to set u equal to one minus 5x. So d u is negative five dx. In other words,
dx is negative 1/5 times do. Looking at my bounds of integration, when x is equal to
two, u is equal to one minus five times two, which is negative
nine. And when x is equal to five, u is equal to negative 24. substituting into my integral,
I get the integral from negative nine to negative 24 of one over u times negative 1/5. Do and
that's divided by three. Now dividing by three is same as multiplying by 1/3. And as I integrate,
I'm going to pull the negative 1/5 out and then take the integral of one over u, that's
ln of the absolute value of u evaluated in between negative 24 and negative nine. The
absolute value signs are important here because they prevent me from trying to take the natural
log of negative numbers to evaluate get negative 1/15 times ln of 24 minus ln
of nine, I can use my log rolls to simplify and get negative 1/15 ln of 24 over nine,
that's negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and as a decimal, that's approximately negative
0.0654. So I found the average value of G. Now my next question is, does g ever achieve
that average value, in other words, is there a number c in the interval from two to five
for which GFC equals its average value? Well, one way to find out is just to set GFC equal
to G's average value. In other words, set one over one minus five c equal to negative
1/15 ln of eight thirds, and try to solve for C. There are lots of ways to solve this
equation. But I'm going to take the reciprocal of both sides, subtract one from both sides
and divide by negative five. This simplifies to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5,
which is approximately 3.25. And that x value does lie inside the interval from two to five.
So we've demonstrated that g does achieve its average value over the interval. But in
fact, we could have predicted this to be true. Gs average value has to lie somewhere between
GS minimum value and maximum value on this interval. And since G is continuous on the
interval from two to five, it has to achieve every value that lies in between as minimum
and maximum, including its average value. The same argument shows that for any continuous
function, the function must achieve its average value on an interval. And this is known as
the mean value theorem for integrals. Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval
from a to b, there has to be at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of
c equals its average value, or, in symbols, f of c equals the integral from A b of f of
x dx divided by b minus a. This video gave the definition of an average value of a function,
and stated the mean value theorem for integrals. If we rewrite the formula for average value
a little, then we can see a geometric interpretation for average value, the area of the box with
height the average value is the same as the area under the curve. This video gives two
proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals. the mean value theorem for integrals says
the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b, there's some number
c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value of f. The first proof
that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem. Recall that the intermediate
value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f, defined on an interval, which
I'll call x 1x, two, if we have some number l in between f of x one and f of x two, then
f has to achieve the value out somewhere between x one and x two. Keeping in mind the intermediate
value theorem, let's turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals. Now
it's possible that our function f of x might be constant on the interval from a to b. But
if that's true, then our mean value theorem for integrals holds easily, because f AV is
just equal to that constant, which is equal to f OC for any c between A and B. So let's
assume that f is not constant. Well, like continuous function on a closed interval has
to have a minimum value and a maximum value, which I'll call little m, and big M. Now we
know that F's average value on the interval has to be between its maximum value and its
minimum value. If you don't believe this, consider the fact that all of us values on
the interval have to lie between big M and little m. And if we integrate this inequality We get little m times b minus a is less than
or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a. Notice
that the first and the last integrals, we're just integrating a constant. Now if I divide
all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average
value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted. Now, I just need to apply the
intermediate value theorem, with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my
values of f of x one and f of x two. The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved
by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two. And therefore, for some C in my interval
a b. And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals. Now I'm going to give a second
proof for the mean value theorem for integrals. And this time, it's going to be as a corollary
to the regular mean value theorem for functions. Recall that the mean value theorem
for functions, says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that
interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at
C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the
mean value theorem for integrals. I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral
from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value
theorem for integrals. Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is
zero, while g of B is the integral from a to b of our function. Now, by the fundamental
theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval
a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x. And by the mean value theorem for functions,
we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some numbers,
C and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below,
we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus
a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach. This shows that the mean
value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our
function is an integral. And this completes the second proof of the main value theorem
for integrals. So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different
ways. And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way.