Transcript for: Power rule introduction (old) | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. In the last presentation I
showed you that if I had the function f of x is equal to x
squared, that the derivative of this function, which is denoted
by f look at that, my pen is already malfunctioning. The derivative of that
function, f prime of x, is equal to 2x. And I used the limit
definition of a derivative. I used, let me write
it down here. This pen is horrible. I need to really figure out
some other tool to use. The limit as h approaches 0 
sometimes you'll see delta x instead of h, but it's the same
thing of f of x plus h minus f of x over h. And I used this definition of a
derivative, which is really just the slope at any given
point along the curve, to figure this out. That if f of x is equal
to x squared, that the derivative is 2x. And you could actually
use this to do others. And I won't do it now,
maybe I'll do it in a future presentation. But it turns out that if you
have f of x is equal to x to the third, that the derivative
is f prime of x is equal to 3x squared. If f of x is equal to x to
the fourth, well then the derivative is equal
to 4x to the third. I think you're starting
to see a pattern here. If I actually wrote up here
that if f of x  let me see if I have space to
write it neatly. If I wrote f of x  I hope
you can see this  f of x is equal to x. Well you know this. I mean, y equals x, what's
the slope of y equals x? That's just 1, right? y equals x, that's
a slope of 1. You didn't need to know
calculus to know that. f prime of x is
just equal to 1. And then you can probably
guess what the next one is. If f of x is equal to x to the
fifth, then the derivative is I think you could guess
5 x to the fourth. So in general, for any
expression within a polynomial, or any degree x to whatever
power let's say f of x is equal to this pen
drives me nuts. f of x is equal to
x to the n, right? Where n could be any exponent. Then f prime of x is equal
to nx to the n minus 1. And you see this is what
the case was in all these situations. That 1 didn't show up. n minus 1. So if n was 25, x to the
25th power, the derivative would be 25 x to the 24th. So I'm going to use this rule
and then I'm going to show you a couple of other ones. And then now we can figure out
the derivative of pretty much any polynomial function. So just another
couple of rules. This might be a little
intuitive for you, and if you use that limit definition of a
derivative, you could actually prove it. But if I want to figure out the
derivative of, let's say, the derivative of So another way
of this is kind of, what is the change with respect to x? This is another notation. I think this is what Leibniz
uses to figure out the derivative operator. So if I wanted to find the
derivative of A f of x, where A is just some constant number. It could be 5 times f of x. This is the same thing
as saying A times the derivative of f of x. And what does that tell us? Well, this tells us that,
let's say I had f of x. f of x is equal to and this
only works with the constants f of x is equal to 5x squared. Right? Well this is the same thing
as 5 times x squared. I know I'm stating the obvious. So we can just say that the
derivative of this is just 5 times the derivative
of x squared. So f prime of x is equal to
5 times, and what's the derivative of x squared? Right, it's 2x. So it equals 10x. Right? Similarly, let's say I
had g of x, just using a different letter. g of x is equal to and my
pen keeps malfunctioning. g of x is equal to, let's
say, 3x to the 12th. Then g prime of x, or the
derivative of g, is equal to 3 times the derivative
of x to the 12th. Well we know what that is. It's 12 x to the 11th. Which you would have seen. 12x to the 11th. This equals 36x to the 11th. Pretty straightforward, right? You just multiply the
constant times whatever the derivative would have been. I think you get that. Now one other thing. If I wanted to apply the
derivative operator let me change colors just to mix
things up a little bit. Let's say if I wanted to apply
the derivative of operator I think this is called
the addition rule. It might be a little
bit obvious. f of x plus g of x. This is the same thing as the
derivative of f of x plus the derivative3 of g of x. That might seem a little
complicated to you, but all it's saying is that you can
find the derivative of each of the parts when you're adding
up, and then that's the derivative of the whole thing. I'll do a couple of examples. So what does this tell us? This is also the same
thing, of course. This is, I believe,
Leibniz's notation. And then Lagrange's notation
is of course these were the founding fathers of calculus. That's the same thing as f
prime of x plus g prime of x. And let me apply this, because
whenever you apply it, I think it starts to seem a
lot more obvious. So let's say f of x is equal
to 3x squared plus 5x plus 3. Well, if we just want to figure
out the derivative, we say f prime of x, we just find the
derivative of each of these terms. Well, this is 3 times the
derivative of x squared. The derivative of x squared,
we already figured out, is 2x, right? So this becomes 6x. Really you just take the 2,
multiply it by the 3, and then decrement the 2 by 1. So it's really 6x to the first,
which is the same thing as 6x. Plus the derivative of 5x is 5. And you know that because if I
just had a line that's y equals 5x, the slope is 5, right? Plus, what's the derivative
of a constant function? What's the derivative of 3? Well, I'll give you a hint. Graph y equals 3 and tell
me what the slope is. Right, the derivative
of a constant is 0. I'll show other times why that
might be more intuitive. Plus 0. You can just ignore that. f prime of x is
equal to 6x plus 5. Let's do some more. I think the more examples
we do, the better. And I want to keep switching
notations, so you don't get daunted whenever you see
it in a different way. Let's say y equals 10x to
the fifth minus 7x to the third plus 4x plus 1. So here we're going to apply
the derivative operator. So we say dy this
is I think Leibniz's notation dy over dx. And that's just the change
in y over the change in x, over very small changes. That's kind of how I view this
d, like a very small delta. Is equal to 5 times 10 is 50
x to the fourth minus 21  right, 3 times 7
x squared plus 4. And then the 1, the
derivative of 1 is just 0. So there it is. We figured out the
derivative of this very complicated function. And it was pretty
straightforward. I think you'll find that
derivatives of polynomials are actually more straightforward
than a lot of concepts that you learned a lot earlier
in mathematics. That's all the time I have
now for this presentation. In the next couple I'll just do
a bunch of more examples, and I'll show you some more rules
for solving even more complicated derivatives. See you in the next
presentation. 