Transcript for: Evaluating Hyperbolic Trig Functions
in this video we're going to talk about how to evaluate hyperbolic trig functions so what is the value of hyperbolic sine of zero in order to find that answer we need to know the formula for hyperbolic sine of x it's equal to the exponential functions e to the x minus E to the negative x divided by 2. so all we need to do is substitute X 4 0 in that formula so it's e to the 0 minus E to the negative 0 over 2. anything raised to the zero power is one so it's one minus one over two so becomes 0 over 2 which is zero so that is the value of hyperbolic sine of zero it equals zero now let's try another example what is the value of hyperbolic cosine of zero feel free to pause the video if you want to try that example so first we need to know the formula for hyperbolic cosine it's e to the X Plus e to the negative x divided by 2. so this is going to be e to the 0 Plus e to the negative zero over two e to the zero is one e to the negative zero is the same as e to the zero which is going to be one one plus one is two two divided by two is one so hyperbolic cosine of zero is equal to one much in the same way that sine zero is equal to zero and cosine zero is one try this one what is the value of hyperbolic sine of ln2 go ahead and work on that problem so this is going to be e raised to the ln2 minus E to the negative ln2 over 2. now what is e to the ln2 when deal with natural logs you have a base e here it turns out that these cancel out and you just get two for the next one this negative one I want to move it to the exponent of 2. that's the property of logs that will allow me to do so this will be ln2 to the minus 1. 2 to the negative 1 is the same as one-half so these will cancel and I'm just going to get one half here now what I'm going to do is I'm going to multiply the top and bottom by 2 just to get rid of the fraction so here I have 2 times 2 which is 4. 2 times a half is one and on the bottom two times two is four four minus 1 is 3 so I get 3 over 4. as the final answer so that's the value of hyperbolic sine of ln2 it's 3 over 4. try this one what is the value of hyperbolic cotangent of ln5 so hyperbolic cotangent and put it here is hyperbolic cosine over hyperbolic sine here we have cosine so this is going to be e to the ln5 plus e to the negative ln5 divided by 2. and then for hyperbolic sine of ln5 we're going to use this formula so it's e to the ln5 minus E to the negative ln5 over 2. so multiplying the top and bottom by 2 we can get rid of this now e to the Ln 5 is simply 5. and this is going to be plus e to the Ln 5 to the minus 1 or 1 over 5. over 5 minus and we could do the same thing here this is going to be e to the Ln 1 over 5. so the E's will cancel giving us one over five on the bottom the same thing is going to have happen but it's going to be negative one over five so I'm going to multiply the top and the bottom fraction by 5. so we have 5 times let's do that again 5 times 5. is 25 and then 5 times 1 over 5 that's just going to be 1. here we have 25 and 5 times negative one-fifth that's going to be negative one 25 plus 1 is 26 25 minus 1 is 24. 26 is 13 times 2 24 is 12 times 2. so we can cross out a 2. and this is going to be 13 over 12. so that is the value of cotangent natural log of 5. it's 13 over 12. let's try this one what is the value of hyperbolic sine of 3. so this is going to be e to the 3 minus E to the negative 3. over 2. so I'm going to rewrite that as one-half e to the third minus E to the negative 3. and there's really not much we can do in terms of simplifying it at this point all we could do right now is plug this into the calculator now it's good to know that e to the negative 3 . this is very close to zero so we can approximate our answer and say it's approximately one half e to the Third so let's go ahead and get the values for these answers so let's start with the the one on top 0.5 e to the third minus E to the negative 3. this is 10.0179 as for this answer 25 e to the third power it's 10.04 277. in both cases we could round the answer and say it's approximately 10.0 and we would be accurate enough so if you want to get an approximate simplified answer you could say it's this if this was to the second power I wouldn't really get rid of this one because it might still be significant but if it's like negative 3 negative 4 negative 5 it's going to be close enough to zero where you can just ignore that part so that's basically it for this video now you know how to evaluate hyperbolic trig functions now this is for those of you who want to get access to all of my video playlists and exam review videos all in one spot so if you go to video.net and if you go here click more video playlists you can get access to all the different video playlists that I have on my YouTube channel and also the final exam review videos as well so feel free to take a look at that when you get a chance 