Transcript for: Summation Formulas and Sigma Notation - Calculus
in this video we're going to go over the summation formulas that you need to know in calculus particularly if you want to find the area of a region so let's say if we wish to evaluate this sum so it's given to us using sigma notation so what is this equal to now there is a formula for this type of problem if you have a constant c and if i is equal to one and it goes up to n then it's going to equal the constant times n in this case we're adding eight four times so the constant is eight so therefore adding eight four times is the same as multiplying eight by four and this will give you 32. now let's work on some other examples try these two problems let's say i is one the constant is seven and this is eight and also let's say this is nine and this is five so the first one is simply going to be c times n seven times eight so that's 56 for the second example it's going to be c times n or nine times five which is forty five so that's how you can evaluate a sum if you have a constant in sigma notation now the next formula that you need to be familiar with is this one so instead of a constant we're going to have the variable i and we're going to go up to n so this is going to equal n times n plus 1 divided by 2. so let me give an example so let's say i is one and we have the variable i and let's go up to five so we need to add up all the numbers from one to five so when you replace i with one you get one if you replace with two it's going to be two and we're dealing with sum so we have to add everything up to five one plus two is three three plus three is six 6 plus 4 is 10 10 plus 5 is 15. now let's confirm that answer using the formula above so n is this top number it's five so it's going to be five times five plus one divided by two five plus one is six and six divided by two is three and five times three is fifteen so as you can see this will give you the same answer try this problem so let's say if we have six times i where i starts from one and it stops at four go ahead and evaluate the sum so when i is one six times one is six when i is 2 6 times 2 is 12 6 times 3 is 18 6 times 4 is 24 now 12 plus 18 that's 30 and 6 plus 24 is also 30. 30 plus 30 is 60. so that's the sum for this example now let's use the formula to confirm the answer so what i'm going to do is take the constant and move it to the front so what i have is 6 times the sum of i equals 1 to 4 for the variable i so it's going to be 6 times n n plus one divided by two where n is the top number four so that's going to be six times four and then four plus one all divided by two now four divided by two is two and four plus one is five two times five is ten and six times ten is 60. so in the end we get the same answer so that's how you can use the formula to evaluate that particular sum let's try another example evaluate this one so let's say if this is 7i minus 3. going from one to five go ahead and try that so if we plug in one seven times one minus three is four if we plug in two seven times two is fourteen minus 3 is 11. if we plug in 3 7 times 3 is 21 minus 3 is 18. notice that the numbers are increasing by 7. we have an arithmetic sequence but with a sum so the next number is going to be 25 and the fifth one the last one is 32. now 4 plus 11 is 15 and then if we add 18 and 32 that's going to be 50. and then 15 and 25 that's 40 40 plus 50 is 90. so the sum is 90. now let's use the summation formulas to get the same answer so i'm going to write it as 7 times the sigma notation for i going from one to five and then minus three you want to separate it into two parts so for i the formula is going to be n times n minus one divided by two and for the constant is simply c times n and the constant three so it's gonna be three times n where n is five so that's going to be seven times five and it's supposed to be plus one not minus one five plus one is six and then this is going to be three times five now i'm running out of space so i'm just gonna continue here seven times five is thirty five and six divided by two is three three times five is fifteen now thirty five times three thirty times 3 is 90 5 times 3 is 15 so 90 plus 15 that's 105 and 105 minus 15 is 90. and so you get the same answer now for the sake of practice go ahead and try this example feel free to pause the video if you want to try it let's say this is going to be 9i plus seven so this is going to be nine times the sigma notation for i going from one to five and plus the sigma notation at for seven as a constant actually supposed to be eight not five so n is eight in this example this is going to be nine times n times n plus one divided by two plus seven times n where n is eight so this is going to be 9 times 8 8 plus 1 is 9 divided by 2 and then plus 7 times 8. now 9 times 9 is 81 and eight divided by two is four and seven times eight is fifty-six eighty-one times four eighty times four is three twenty and then one times four is four so that's three twenty-four if you add fifty-six to it that's going to give you 380 which is the final answer now let's confirm it using simple addition so if we plug in one nine times one plus seven that's sixteen and then if we plug in two nine times two is eighteen plus seven that's twenty-five and then three nine times three is twenty-seven plus seven thirty-four so it's going up by nine the next one's gonna be 43 that's the fourth number and then 52 and then 61 and then 70. so we have seven numbers now the last one nine times eight is 72 plus 779 so let's use a calculator for this so if we add 16 25 34 43 52 61 70 and 77 i mean that's 77 but 79 this will give us 380 so we get the exact same answer now let's move on to the next formula and it's this time i squared instead of i it's equal to n times n plus one times two n plus one divided by six so let's confirm that with an example so let's say if we have i squared and we wish to go up to six this is going to be one squared plus two squared plus three squared plus four squared plus five squared plus six squared so one squared is one two squared is four three squared is nine four squared is sixteen five squared is twenty-five six squared is thirty-six now if we add one plus nine that's going to give us ten and then if we add four and 16. that's going to give us a nice number that's 20. and 25 and 36 20 and 30 is 50 5 and 6 is 11 so that's going to be 61. 10 plus 20 is 30 plus 61 that's 91. now let's get the same answer using that formula so let's erase this so n is six n plus one that's going to be seven and then two n plus one two times six is twelve plus one that's thirteen divided by six so we could cancel six and then seven times thirteen seven times ten is seventy seven times three is twenty one seventy and twenty one gives us ninety one so this example confirms this formula now the last formula that we need to talk about is i to the third power so it's going to be n squared times n plus 1 squared divided by 4. so let's use an example and let's say n is four let's keep it simple so this is gonna be one to the third plus two to the third plus three to the third plus four to the third power so two to the third is eight three cubed is twenty-seven four q is sixty-four so 1 plus 8 plus 27 plus 64. that's equal to 100. now let's see if we can get the same answer using this formula so i'm going to work it right here so n is 4 that's going to be 4 squared and 4 plus 1 is 5 divided by 4. so we can cancel a 4 leaving 1 4 on top 5 squared is 25 and four times twenty five is a hundred so this is the formula for i to the third if you ever need to use it now let's work on a few practice examples so let's say if we have i times i squared plus 4i go ahead and try this now the first thing i recommend doing is to distribute the i to i squared plus 4i so this is going to be i to the third power and then i times 4i that's 4i squared and then we could separate it into two separate sums so the first one is just i to the third power and for the second one it's going to be plus 4 times i squared now the formula for i to the third power is going to be n squared times n plus one squared over four and then for the second one it's going to be four times the formula for i squared which is n n plus one times two n plus one divided by six and keep in mind n is five based on what we see here so let's plug in five this is going to be five squared and then five plus one is six on the right we have four times five five plus one is six two times five is ten plus one that's eleven divided by six so at least we could cancel a six on the right side now five squared is twenty five six times six is thirty six on the right four times five is twenty now 36 divided by 4 that's 9. and what's 20 times 11 so if you have 11 20 bills how much money do you have that's going to be and if you have nine quarters you have two dollars and 25 cents so 25 times 9 is 225 plus 220 that's going to be 445 and that's the answer now let's work on one last problem so let's say if we have i minus 1 squared from 1 to 9. go ahead and evaluate it now the first thing i would do is foil i minus 1 squared so this is i minus 1 times i minus 1. and so i times i that's going to be i squared and then we have i times negative 1 so that's negative i negative 1 times i is also negative i and then the last one is negative one times negative one which is positive one so now let's combine like terms so this becomes i squared minus two i plus one so we can rewrite the problem like this now let's separate it into three separate sums so we have i squared from one to nine and then minus two times the sum of i from one to nine and then we have a constant so now let's apply the appropriate formulas so for i squared it's going to be n times n plus 1 times 2n plus 1 divided by six and then minus two times the formula for i which is n n plus one divided by two and for the constant it's just gonna be the constant times n and keep in mind n is equal to 9 for this problem so on the left it's going to be 9 and then nine plus one is ten two times nine which is eighteen plus one that's nineteen here we could cancel the twos and so it's gonna be nine times nine plus one which is 10 and then plus n so that's 9. now 9 times 10 is 90. and on the right we also have another 9 times 10 which is 90 as well ninety divided by six is fifteen so we have fifteen times nineteen and nineteen is just twenty minus one negative 90 plus 9 or 9 minus 90 that's negative 81. now 15 times 20 is 300 and 15 times 1 is 15. so 15 times 19 is really 285 285 minus 81 is 204 and that is the final answer you 