Transcript for: Newton, Leibniz, and Usain Bolt | Derivatives introduction | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
This is a picture
of Isaac Newton, super famous British
mathematician and physicist. This is a picture of
a Gottfried Leibnitz, super famous, or
maybe not as famous, but maybe should be,
famous German philosopher and mathematician, and he was
a contemporary of Isaac Newton. These two gentlemen
together were really the founding
fathers of calculus. And they did some of their
most of their major work in the late 1600s. And this right over here is
Usain Bolt, Jamaican sprinter, whose continuing to do some
of his best work in 2012. And as of early 2012, he's
the fastest human alive, and he's probably the fastest
human that has ever lived. And you might have not made the
association with these three gentleman. You might not think that
they have a lot in common. But they were all obsessed with
the same fundamental question. And this is the same
fundamental question that differential
calculus addresses. And the question is, what
is the instantaneous rate of change of something? And in the case of Usain Bolt,
how fast is he going right now? Not just what his average
speed was for the last second, or his average speed
over the next 10 seconds. How fast is he going right now? And so this is what differential
calculus is all about. Instantaneous rates of change. Differential calculus. Newton's actual original term
for differential calculus was the method of
fluxions, which actually sounds a
little bit fancier. But it's all about what's
happening in this instant. And to think about why that
is not a super easy problem to address with
traditional algebra, let's draw a little graph here. So on this axis
I'll have distance. I'll say y is equal to distance. I could have said d
is equal to distance, but we'll see, especially
later on in calculus, d is reserved for
something else. We'll say y is
equal to distance. And in this axis,
we'll say time. And I could say t
is equal to time, but I'll just say
x is equal to time. And so if we were to plot
Usain Bolt's distance as a function of time,
well at time zero he hasn't gone anywhere. He is right over there. And we know that
this gentleman is capable of traveling 100
meters in 9.58 seconds. So after 9.58
seconds, we'll assume that this is in seconds
right over here, he's capable of
going 100 meters. And so using this
information, we can actually figure
out his average speed. Let me write it this
way, his average speed is just going to be
his change in distance over his change in time. And using the variables
that are over here, we're saying y is distance. So this is the same
thing as change in y over change in x from
this point to that point. And this might look
somewhat familiar to you from basic algebra. This is the slope
between these two points. If I have a line that
connects these two points, this is the slope of that line. The change in distance
is this right over here. Change in y is
equal to 100 meters. And our change in time
is this right over here. So our change in time is
equal to 9.58 seconds. We started at 0, we
go to 9.58 seconds. Another way to think about it,
the rise over the run you might have heard in your
algebra class. It's going to be 100
meters over 9.58 seconds. So this is 100 meters
over 9.58 seconds. And the slope is essentially
just rate of change, or you could view it
as the average rate of change between
these two points. And you'll see, if you
even just follow the units, it gives you units
of speed here. It would be velocity if we
also specified the direction. And we can figure
out what that is, let me get the calculator out. So let me get the
calculator on the screen. So we're going 100 meters
in the 9.58 seconds. So it's 10.4, I'll just write
10.4, I'll round to 10.4. So it's approximately
10.4, and then the units are meters per second. And that is his average speed. And what we're going
to see in a second is how average
speed is different than instantaneous speed. How it's different
than what the speed he might be going
at any given moment. And just to have a concept
of how fast this is, let me get the calculator back. This is in meters per second. If you wanted to know how many
meters he's going in an hour, well there's 3,600
seconds in an hour. So he'll be able to go this
many meters 3,600 times. So that's how many
meters he can, if he were able to somehow
keep up that speed in an hour. This is how fast he's
going meters per hour. And then, if you were to
say how many miles per hour, there's roughly 1600 and I
don't know the exact number, but roughly 1600
meters per mile. So let's divide it by 1600. And so you see that this is
roughly a little over 23, about 23 and 1/2 miles per hour. So this is
approximately, and I'll write it this way this
is approximately 23.5 miles per hour. And relative to a
car, not so fast. But relative to
me, extremely fast. Now to see how this is different
than instantaneous velocity, let's think about a potential
plot of his distance relative to time. He's not going to just go
this speed immediately. He's not just going to go
as soon as the gun fires, he's not just going to go 23 and
1/2 miles per hour all the way. He's going to accelerate. So at first he's going to start
off going a little bit slower. So the slope is going to
be a little bit lot lower than the average slope. He's going to go a
little bit slower, then he's going to
start accelerating. And so his speed, and
you'll see the slope here is getting steeper and
steeper and steeper. And then maybe near the end he
starts tiring off a little bit. And so his distance
plotted against time might be a curve that
looks something like this. And what we calculated
here is just the average slope across
this change in time. What we could see
at any given moment the slope is actually different. In the beginning,
he has a slower rate of change of distance. Then over here, then he
accelerates over here, it seems like his rate of
change of distance, which would be roughly
or you could view it as the slope of the
tangent line at that point, it looks higher
than his average. And then he starts
to slow down again. When you average it out, it gets
to 23 and 1/2 miles per hour. And I looked it up, Usain
Bolt's instantaneous velocity, his peak instantaneous
velocity, is actually closer to 30 miles per hour. So the slope over here might
be 23 whatever miles per hour. But the instantaneous,
his fastest point in this 9.58 seconds is
closer to 30 miles per hour. But you see it's not
a trivial thing to do. You could say, OK, let me try
to approximate the slope right over here. And you could do that
by saying, OK, well, what is the change in y over the
change of x right around this? So you could say, well, let
me take some change of x, and figure out what the
change of y is around it, or as we go past that. So you get that. But that would just
be an approximation, because you see that
the slope of this curve is constantly changing. So what you want
to do is see what happens as your change
of x gets smaller and smaller and smaller. As your change of x get smaller
and smaller and smaller, you're going to get a better
and better approximation. Your change of y is
going to get smaller and smaller and smaller. So what you want
to do, and we're going to go into depth
into all of this, and study it more
rigorously, is you want to take the limit
as delta x approaches 0 of your change in y
over your change in x. And when you do
that, you're going to approach that
instantaneous rate of change. You could view it as
the instantaneous slope at that point in the curve. Or the slope of the tangent
line at that point in the curve. Or if we use
calculus terminology, we would view that
as the derivative. So the instantaneous
slope is the derivative. And the notation we use for
the derivative is a dy over dx. And that's why I
reserved the letter y. And then you say,
well, how does this relate to the word differential? Well, the word
differential is relating this dy is a differential,
dx is a differential. And one way to
conceptualize it, this is an infinitely
small change in y over an infinitely
small change in x. And by getting super,
super small changes in y over change in x, you're able
to get your instantaneous slope. Or in the case of this example,
the instantaneous speed of Usain Bolt right
at that moment. And notice, you can't
just put a 0 here. If you just put
change in x is zero, you're going to get
something that's undefined. You can't divide by 0. So we take the limit
as it approaches 0. And we'll define
that more rigorously in the next few videos. 

Transcript for: Introduction to limits | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In this video, I want
to familiarize you with the idea of a limit, which
is a super important idea. It's really the idea that all
of calculus is based upon. But despite being
so super important, it's actually a really, really,
really, really, really, really simple idea. So let me draw a
function here, actually, let me define a function here,
a kind of a simple function. So let's define f of x,
let's say that f of x is going to be x minus
1 over x minus 1. And you might say,
hey, Sal look, I have the same thing in the
numerator and denominator. If I have something
divided by itself, that would just be equal to 1. Can't I just simplify
this to f of x equals 1? And I would say, well,
you're almost true, the difference between
f of x equals 1 and this thing right over here,
is that this thing can never equal this thing is
undefined when x is equal to 1. Because if you set,
let me define it. Let me write it over
here, if you have f of, sorry not f of 0, if you
have f of 1, what happens. In the numerator,
we get 1 minus 1, which is, let me just write
it down, in the numerator, you get 0. And in the denominator, you
get 1 minus 1, which is also 0. And so anything divided by
0, including 0 divided by 0, this is undefined. So you can make
the simplification. You can say that this is you the
same thing as f of x is equal to 1, but you would have to add
the constraint that x cannot be equal to 1. Now this and this
are equivalent, both of these are
going to be equal to 1 for all other X's other
than one, but at x equals 1, it becomes undefined. This is undefined and
this one's undefined. So how would I
graph this function. So let me graph it. So that, is my y is
equal to f of x axis, y is equal to f of x axis,
and then this over here is my x-axis. And then let's say this is
the point x is equal to 1. This over here would be
x is equal to negative 1. This is y is equal to 1, right
up there I could do negative 1. but that matter much relative to
this function right over here. And let me graph it. So it's essentially for
any x other than 1 f of x is going to be equal to 1. So it's going to
be, look like this. It's going to look
like this, except at 1. At 1 f of x is undefined. So I'm going to put a
little bit of a gap right over here, the circle to signify
that this function is not defined. We don't know what this
function equals at 1. We never defined it. This definition of the
function doesn't tell us what to do with 1. It's literally undefined,
literally undefined when x is equal to 1. So this is the function
right over here. And so once again, if someone
were to ask you what is f of 1, you go, and let's say that
even though this was a function definition, you'd go,
OK x is equal to 1, oh wait there's a gap in
my function over here. It is undefined. So let me write it again. It's kind of redundant, but I'll
rewrite it f of 1 is undefined. But what if I were
to ask you, what is the function
approaching as x equals 1. And now this is starting to
touch on the idea of a limit. So as x gets closer
and closer to 1. So as we get closer
and closer x is to 1, what is the
function approaching. Well, this entire
time, the function, what's a getting
closer and closer to. On the left hand side,
no matter how close you get to 1, as long
as you're not at 1, you're actually at f
of x is equal to 1. Over here from the right hand
side, you get the same thing. So you could say, and
we'll get more and more familiar with this idea
as we do more examples, that the limit as x and
L-I-M, short for limit, as x approaches 1 of f of x
is equal to, as we get closer, we can get unbelievably, we
can get infinitely close to 1, as long as we're not at 1. And our function is
going to be equal to 1, it's getting closer and
closer and closer to 1. It's actually at
1 the entire time. So in this case, we
could say the limit as x approaches
1 of f of x is 1. So once again, it has very fancy
notation, but it's just saying, look what is a
function approaching as x gets closer
and closer to 1. Let me do another example where
we're dealing with a curve, just so that you have
the general idea. So let's say that
I have the function f of x, let me just for
the sake of variety, let me call it g of x. Let's say that we have
g of x is equal to, I could define it this way, we
could define it as x squared, when x does not equal, I don't
know when x does not equal 2. And let's say that when x
equals 2 it is equal to 1. So once again, a kind
of an interesting function that, as you'll
see, is not fully continuous, it has a discontinuity. Let me graph it. So this is my y
equals f of x axis, this is my x-axis
right over here. Let me draw x equals 2, x,
let's say this is x equals 1, this is x equals 2, this is
negative 1, this is negative 2. And then let me draw, so
everywhere except x equals 2, it's equal to x squared. So let me draw it like this. So it's going to be a parabola,
looks something like this, let me draw a better
version of the parabola. So it'll look
something like this. Not the most beautifully
drawn parabola in the history of
drawing parabolas, but I think it'll
give you the idea. I think you know what a
parabola looks like, hopefully. It should be symmetric,
let me redraw it because that's kind of ugly. And that's looking better. OK, all right, there you go. All right, now, this would be
the graph of just x squared. But this can't be. It's not x squared
when x is equal to 2. So once again, when
x is equal to 2, we should have a little bit
of a discontinuity here. So I'll draw a gap right over
there, because when x equals 2 the function is equal to 1. When x is equal to
2, so let's say that, and I'm not doing them on the
same scale, but let's say that. So this, on the graph of f
of x is equal to x squared, this would be 4, this would
be 2, this would be 1, this would be 3. So when x is equal to 2,
our function is equal to 1. So this is a bit of
a bizarre function, but we can define it this way. You can define a function
however you like to define it. And so notice, it's
just like the graph of f of x is equal to x squared,
except when you get to 2, it has this gap,
because you don't use the f of x is equal to x
squared when x is equal to 2. You use f of x
or I should say g of x you use g
of x is equal to 1. Have I been saying f of x? I apologize for that. You use g of x is equal to 1. So then then at 2, just
at 2, just exactly at 2, it drops down to 1. And then it keeps going
along the function g of x is equal to, or I
should say, along the function x squared. So my question to you. So there's a couple
of things, if I were to just evaluate
the function g of 2. Well, you'd look
at this definition, OK, when x equals 2, I use
this situation right over here. And it tells me, it's
going to be equal to 1. Let me ask a more
interesting question. Or perhaps a more
interesting question. What is the limit as x
approaches 2 of g of x. Once again, fancy notation,
but it's asking something pretty, pretty, pretty simple. It's saying as x gets closer and
closer to 2, as you get closer and closer, and this isn't
a rigorous definition, we'll do that in future videos. As x gets closer and closer to
2, what is g of x approaching? So if you get to 1.9, and
then 1.999, and then 1.999999, and then 1.9999999, what
is g of x approaching. Or if you were to go from
the positive direction. If you were to say
2.1, what's g of 2.1, what's g of 2.01, what's g of
2.001, what is that approaching as we get closer
and closer to it. And you can see it visually
just by drawing the graph. As g gets closer
and closer to 2, and if we were to
follow along the graph, we see that we
are approaching 4. Even though that's not
where the function is, the function drops down to 1. The limit of g of x as x
approaches 2 is equal to 4. And you could even do this
numerically using a calculator, and let me do that, because I
think that will be interesting. So let me get the
calculator out, let me get my trusty TI-85 out. So here is my calculator,
and you could numerically say, OK, what's it
going to approach as you approach x equals 2. So let's try 1.94,
for x is equal to 1.9, you would use this top
clause right over here. So you'd have 1.9 squared. And so you get 3.61, well what
if you get even closer to 2, so 1.99, and once again,
let me square that. Well now I'm at 3.96. What if I do 1.999,
and I square that? I'm going to have 3.996. Notice I'm going
closer, and closer, and closer to our point. And if I did, if I
got really close, 1.9999999999 squared,
what am I going to get to. It's not actually
going to be exactly 4, this calculator just
rounded things up, but going to get to a number
really, really, really, really, really, really, really,
really, really close to 4. And we can do something from
the positive direction too. And it actually has
to be the same number when we approach from the below
what we're trying to approach, and above what we're
trying to approach. So if we try to 2.1
squared, we get 4.4. If we do 2. let me go a couple
of steps ahead, 2.01, so this is much
closer to 2 now, squared. Now we are getting
much closer to 4. So the closer we
get to 2, the closer it seems like
we're getting to 4. So once again,
that's a numeric way of saying that the
limit, as x approaches 2 from either direction of g
of x, even though right at 2, the function is equal to 1,
because it's discontinuous. The limit as we're
approaching 2, we're getting closer, and
closer, and closer to 4. 

Transcript for: Introduction to limits 2 | Limits | Precalculus | Khan Academy
Welcome to the
presentation on limits. Let's get started with some
well, first an explanation before I do any problems. So let's say I had let me
make sure I have the right color and my pen works. OK, let's say I had the limit,
and I'll explain what a limit is in a second. But the way you write it is you
say the limit oh, my color is on the wrong OK, let me
use the pen and yellow. OK, the limit as x
approaches 2 of x squared. Now, all this is saying is what
value does the expression x squared approach as
x approaches 2? Well, this is pretty easy. If we look at let me
at least draw a graph. I'll stay in this yellow color. So let me draw. x squared looks something
like let me use a different color. x square looks something
like this, right? And when x is equal to 2, y,
or the expression because we don't say what
this is equal to. It's just the expression x
squared is equal to 4, right? So a limit is saying, as x
approaches 2, as x approaches 2 from both sides, from numbers
left than 2 and from numbers right than 2, what does
the expression approach? And you might, I think, already
see where this is going and be wondering why we're even going
to the trouble of learning this new concept because it seems
pretty obvious, but as x as we get to x closer and closer
to 2 from this direction, and as we get to x closer
and closer to 2 to this direction, what does
this expression equal? Well, it essentially
equals 4, right? The expression is equal to 4. The way I think about it is as
you move on the curve closer and closer to the expression's
value, what does the expression equal? In this case, it equals 4. You're probably saying, Sal,
this seems like a useless concept because I could have
just stuck 2 in there, and I know that if this is say this
is f of x, that if f of x is equal to x squared, that f of 2
is equal to 4, and that would have been a no-brainer. Well, let me maybe give you one
wrinkle on that, and hopefully now you'll start to see what
the use of a limit is. Let me to define let me say
f of x is equal to x squared when, if x does not equal 2,
and let's say it equals 3 when x equals 2. Interesting. So it's a slight variation on
this expression right here. So this is our new f of x. So let me ask you a question. What is my pen still works
what is the limit I used cursive this time what is the
limit as x that's an x as x approaches 2 of f of x? That's an x. It says x approaches 2. It's just like that. I just I don't know. For some reason, my brain
is working functionally. OK, so let me graph this now. So that's an equally
neat-looking graph as the one I just drew. Let me draw. So now it's almost the same as
this curve, except something interesting happens
at x equals 2. So it's just like this. It's like an x squared
curve like that. But at x equals 2 and
f of x equals 4, we draw a little hole. We draw a hole because it's
not defined at x equals 2. This is x equals 2. This is 2. This is 4. This is the f of x
axis, of course. And when x is equal to
2 let's say this is 3. When x is equal to 2,
f of x is equal to 3. This is actually
right below this. I should it doesn't look
completely right below it, but I think you got
to get the picture. See, this graph is x squared. It's exactly x squared until
we get to x equals 2. At x equals 2, We have a
grap No, not a grap. We have a gap in the
graph, which maybe could be called a grap. We have a gap in the graph, and
then we keep and then after x equals 2, we keep moving on. And that gap, and that gap
is defined right here, what happens when x equals 2? Well, then f of x
is equal to 3. So this graph kind of goes
it's just like x squared, but instead of f of 2 being 4, f
of 2 drops down to 3, but then we keep on going. So going back to the limit
problem, what is the limit as x approaches 2? Now, well, let's think
about the same thing. We're going to go this
is how I visualize it. I go along the curve. Let me pick a different color. So as x approaches 2 from this
side, from the left-hand side or from numbers less than 2, f
of x is approaching values approaching 4, right? f of x
is approaching 4 as x approaches 2, right? I think you see that. If you just follow along the
curve, as you approach f of 2, you get closer and closer to 4. Similarly, as you go from the
right-hand side make sure my thing's still working. As you go from the right-hand
side, you go along the curve, and f of x is also
slowly approaching 4. So, as you can see, as we
go closer and closer and closer to x equals 2, f of
whatever number that is approaches 4, right? So, in this case, the
limit as x approaches 2 is also equal to 4. Well, this is interesting
because, in this case, the limit as x approaches 2 of f
of x does not equal f of 2. Now, normally, this
would be on this line. In this case, the limit as you
approach the expression is equal to evaluating the
expression of that value. In this case, the limit isn't. I think now you're starting to
see why the limit is a slightly different concept than just
evaluating the function at that point because you have
functions where, for whatever reason at a certain point,
either the function might not be defined or the function kind
of jumps up or down, but as you approach that point, you still
approach a value different than the function at that point. Now, that's my introduction. I think this will give you
intuition for what a limit is. In another presentation, I'll
give you the more formal mathematical, you know,
the delta-epsilon definition of a limit. And actually, in the very next
module, I'm now going to do a bunch of problems
involving the limit. I think as you do more and more
problems, you'll get more and more of an intuition as
to what a limit is. And then as we go into drill
derivatives and integrals, you'll actually understand why
people probably even invented limits to begin with. We'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Limit examples (part 1) | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. Now that we hopefully have a
little bit of an intuition of what a limit is, or finding
the limit of a function is, let's do some problems. Some of these you might
actually see on your exams or when you're actually trying to
solve a general limit problem. So let's say what is the
limit once again, my pen is not working. What is the limit as
x approaches let's say negative 1. And let me see, what's a good
let's say my expression is I'll put it in parentheses
so it's cleaner. It's 2x plus 2 over x plus 1. So the first thing I would
always try to do is just say what happens if I just stick x
straight into this expression? What happens? Well, what's 2x plus 2 when
x is equal to negative 1? 2 times negative 1. 2 times negative 1 plus 2
over negative 1 plus 1. Well, the numerator is negative
2 plus 2 that equals 0 over what's the denominator? Negative 1 plus 1. Over 0. And do we know
what 0 over 0 is? Well, no. It's undefined, right? So here's a case, just like
what we saw in that first video, where the limit actually
can't equal what the expression equals when you substitute x
for the number you're trying to find the limit of because you
get an undefined answer. So let's see if, using the
limit, we can come up with a better answer for
what it's approaching. Well, since we're just starting
with these limit problems, let me draw a graph. And I think this is going
to give you the intuition for what we're doing. It'll probably give
you the answer. But then I'll show you how
to solve this analytical. So if I draw a graph,
these are the axes. Actually, I'll do the
graphical and the analytical at the same time. So I want to rewrite this
expression in a way that maybe I can simplify it. So 2x plus 2. Isn't that the same thing
as 2 times x plus 1? 2 times x plus 1, right? 2x plus 2 is the same thing as
2 times x plus one, and then all of that is over x plus 1. So as long as this expression
and this expression don't equal 0, it actually turns out that
this function let's say this is f of x, right? This function. Well, for every value other
than x is equal to negative 1, you could actually
cancel this and this out. And so really, we see that f of
x is equal to I need to find a better tool f of x is equal
to 2 when x does not equal negative 1. And we saw when x is equal to
negative 1, it's undefined. So undefined when
equals negative 1. So how would we graph that? We showed that f of x is equal
to 2 when x does not equal negative 1 and f of x
is undefined when x equals negative 1. And once again, all I did is
kind of rewrite this exact same function, right? I showed that I could simplify
and I could divide the numerator and denominator by x
plus 1 as long as x does not equal negative 1, and that
otherwise, it's undefined. So let me graph this. I'm going to get a
different color. Maybe I'll go with red. So this is 2. So we see that x is and let
me say this is negative 1. So for every other value other
than negative 1, the value of this, of f of x, is equal to 2. This is 1, this is 2,
this is 3, and so on. At negative 1, the
graph is undefined. So there's a hole there. And then we keep going
to the left-hand side. So if we're going to do the
limit, we can just visually say, well, as x let me
do another color now. As x comes from the left-hand
side, what does f of x equal? Well, f of x is 2, 2, 2, 2,
2. f of x is equal to 2 until we get to exactly
negative 1, right? And similarly, when we go
from the other hand, it's the exact same thing. f of x is 2, 2, 2 until
we get to negative 1. So you'll see, and I'll make
sure you see it visually here, that the limit as approaches
negative 1 of 2x plus 2 over x plus 1, it equals 2. Let me draw a line here
so you don't get messed up with all of it. And I'm not formally, I guess,
proving here that the limit is 2, but I'm showing you kind of
an analytical way, and this is actually how it tends to be
done in algebra class, is that you tend to simplify the
expression so that you say, oh, if there wasn't a hole here,
what would the f of x equal, right? And then you'd just
evaluate it at that point. I think this might give you a
little intuition, but this isn't a formal solution. But unless you're asked to,
you tend not to be asked for a formal solution. You actually just tend to ask
what the limit is, and this is the way you could solve it. And actually another way that
you could I mean, I often used to check my answers when I
used to do it is you could take a calculator and try in what
happens when: what is f of minus 1.001, right? And you can also try what is
f of negative 0.999, right? Because what you want to do is
you want to say, well, what does the function equal when I
get really close to negative 1? And then you could keep going
closer and closer to negative 1 and see what the function
approaches, and in this case, you'll see that
it approaches 2. So let's do another problem. Well, let's say, what is
the limit as x approaches 0 of 1 over x? I think here it might be useful
to draw this graph because it'll give you a visual reason,
a visual represent actually, let's do it both ways. Let's say let's do it the
picking-numbers method because I think that'll give you an
intuition and maybe it'll help us draw the graph. So let's say that
this is f of x. f of x you can tell my
presentation is very unplanned f of x is
equal to 1 over x. And we want to find the
limit as x approaches 0. So what is f of actually,
let's make a table. f of x. So clearly when x is equal
to 0, we don't know. It's undefined. 1 over 0 is undefined. But what happens when
x equals minus 0.01? Well, with minus 0.01, 1 over
minus 0.01, that is equal to negative 100, right? What happens when x is equal
to minus 0.001, right? So we're getting closer
and closer to 0 from the negative direction. Well, here it equals
make sure my pen is working, color right. Something's wrong with my tool. Now my computer's
breaking down. Let's see what's going on. I think my computer just froze. Well, I'm going to try to solve
this, and in the very next video, I'm going to continue
on with this problem. So I'll actually see you in the
next presentation while I figure out why my pen isn't
working, and then we'll continue with this problem. See you very soon. 

Transcript for: Limit examples (part 2) | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
OK, hopefully, my
tool is working now. But anyway, so we were saying
when x is equal to minus 0.001, so we're getting closer and
closer to 0 from the negative side, f of x is equal
to minus 1,000, right? You can just evaluate
it yourself, right? And as you see, as x approaches
0 from the negative direction, we get larger and larger or I
guess you could say smaller and smaller negative
numbers, right? You get you know, if it's
minus 0.0001, you'd get minus 10,000, and then minus 100,000,
and then minus 1 million, you could imagine the closer and
closer you get to zero. Similarly, when you go from the
other direction, when you say what is when x is 0.01, there
you get positive 100, right? When x is point the thing is
frozen again when it's 0.001, you get positive 1,000. So as you see, as you approach
0 from the negative direction, you get larger and larger
negative values, or I guess smaller and smaller
negative values. And as you go from the positive
direction, you get larger and larger values. Let me graph this just to give
you a sense of what this graph looks like because this is
actually a good graph to know what it looks like
just generally. So let's say I have the x-axis. This is the y-axis. Change my color. So when x is a negative number,
as x gets really, really, really negative, as x is like
negative infinity, this is approaching zero, but
it's still going to be a slightly negative number. And then as we see from what we
drew, as we approach x is equal to 0, we asymptote, and we
approach negative infinity, right? And similarly, from positive
numbers, if you go out to the right really far, it
approaches 0, but it's still going to be positive. And as we gets closer and
closer to 0, it spikes up, and it goes to positive infinity. You never quite get
x is equal to 0. So in this situation, you
actually have as x approaches so let me give you a different
notation, which you'll probably see eventually. I might actually do a separate
presentation on this. The limit as x approaches 0
from the positive direction, that's this notation
here, of 1/x, right? So this is as x approaches 0
from the positive direction, from the right-hand side, well,
this is equal to infinity. And then the limit as x this
pen, this pen the limit as x approaches 0 from the
negative side of 1/x. This notation just says
the limit as I approach from the negative side. So as I approach x equal 0 from
this direction, right, from this direction, what happens? Well, that is equal
to minus infinity. So since I'm approaching
a different value when I approach from one side
or the other, this limit is actually undefined. I mean, we could say that from
the positive side, it's positive infinity, or from the
negative side, it's negative infinity, but they have to
equal the same thing for this limit to be defined. So this is equal to undefined. So let's do another problem,
and I think this should be interesting now. So let's say, just keeping that
last problem we had in mind, what's the limit as x
approaches 0 of 1/x squared? So in this situation,
I'll draw the graph. That's my x-axis. That's my y-axis. So here, no matter what value
we put into x, we get a positive value, right? Because you're going
to square it. If you put minus you could
actually oh, let me do it. It'll be instructive, I think. Once again, obviously you
can't just put x equal to 0. You'll get 1/0,
which is undefined. But let's say 1 over x squared. What does 1 over x
squared evaluate to? So when x is 0.1, 0.1 squared
is 0.01, so 1/x is 100. Similarly, if I do minus 0.1,
minus 0.1 squared is positive 0.01, so then 1 over that
is still 100, right? So regardless of whether we put
a negative or positive number here, we get a positive value. And similarly, if I put if we
say x is 0.01, if you evaluate it, you'll get 10,000, and if
we put minus 0.01, you'll get positive 10,000 as well, right? Because we square it. So in this graph, if you were
to draw it, and if you have a graphing calculator, you
should experiment, it looks something like this. I can see this dark blue. So from the negative side, it
approaches infinity, right? You can see that. As we get to smaller and
smaller as we get closer and closer to 0 from the negative
side, it approaches infinity. As we go from the positive
side these are actually symmetric, although I didn't
draw it that symmetric it also approaches infinity. So this is a case in which
the limit oh, that's not too bright. I don't know if you can see 
the limit as x approaches 0 from the negative side of 1
over x squared is equal to infinity, and the limit as x
approaches 0 from the positive side of 1 over x squared is
also equal to infinity. So when you go from the
left-hand side, it equals infinity, right? It goes to infinity
as you approach 0. And as you go from the
right-hand side, it also goes to infinity. And so the limit in general
is equal to infinity. And this is why I got excited
when I first started learning limits. Because for the first time,
infinity is a legitimate answer to your problem, which, I don't
know, on some metaphysical level got me kind of excited. But anyway, I will do more
problems in the next presentation because you can
never do enough limit problems. And in a couple of
presentations, I actually give you the formal, kind of
rigorous mathematical definition of the limits. 

Transcript for: Limit examples (part 3) | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's do some more
limit examples. So let's get another problem. If I had the limit as x
approaches 3 of, let's say, x squared minus 6x plus 9
over x squared minus 9. So the first thing I like to do
whenever I see any of these limits problems is just
substitute the number in and see if I get something
that makes sense, and then we'd be done. Well, usually we'd be done. I don't want to make these
sweeping statements. If the function is
continuous, we'd be done. But if we put the 3 in the
numerator, we get 3 squared, which is 9, minus 18 plus 9. So that equals 0. And the denominator also
let's see, 3 squared minus 9, that also equals 0. So we don't like having 0/0. My pen tool is
malfunctioning again. So we don't like getting 0, 0,
0, so is there any way we can simplify this expression to
maybe get it to an expression that, when we evaluate it at x
equals 3, we actually get something that makes sense? Well, whenever I see two of
these polynomials here, and they look, just by inspecting
them, relatively easy to factor, I like to factor them
out because maybe there's the same factor in the numerator
and the denominator, and then we can simplify it. So let's say that this is the
same thing as that looks like it's x plus 3
no, no, no, x minus 3. This is x minus 3. It actually looks like it's x
minus 3 squared, but we're just going to write x minus 3
times x minus 3, which is, of course, x minus 3 squared. And then in the denominator,
you know how to factor these, this is x plus 3 times
x minus 3, all right? So the limit as x approaches 3
of this expression is the same thing as the limit as
x approaches 3 of this expression. And, of course, there's nothing
we can do to change the fact that this function, or this
expression, is undefined at x equals 3. But if we can simplify
it, we can figure out what it approaches. Well, if we assume that x is
any number but 3, we can cross out these two terms because
then they wouldn't be 0, right? It only is 0 when x is equal to
3 because so in the numerator and the denominator, we
can cross this out. And we can say and I'm not
being very rigorous here, but this is kind of how it's
taught, and I think you get the intuition that this is the
same thing as the limit as x approaches 3 of x minus
3 over x plus 3. Now let's just try to stick
the x in and see what we get. Well, in the numerator,
we get 3 minus 3. We still get 0. But in the denominator
here, we get 6, right? 3 plus 3 is 6. So now we get a good number. 0 or 6, well, that's a
real number, so it's 0. 0/6 is 0. So that was interesting. The first time we did it,
we got the answer 0/0. And now we get the answer
0 by simplifying. But, of course, it's very
important to remember that this expression is not
defined at x equals 3. It's defined everywhere but,
but if we were to graph it, and I encourage you to do so, you
would see that as you get closer and closer to x
equals 3, the value of this expression will equal 0. And I know what
you're thinking. Well, this was 0/0. Is every time I get 0/0 going
to end up just becoming 0 when I evaluate the expression? Well, let's explore that. Let me clear this. Let's say what is pen is not
working the limit as x approaches 1 of x squared
minus x minus 2. No, let's say x squared
plus x minus 2. As you can see, I do all
this in my head, and I'm prone to mistakes. And all of that over x minus 1. Well, once again, if we just
evaluate it, let's see what happens when x equals 1. You get 1 squared plus
1, so it's 2 minus 2. You get 0/0. So once again, we get 0/0, and
we have to do something to this maybe to simplify it. Well, let's factor the top. So that's the same thing as
the limit as x approaches 1. Well, that's x minus 1
times x plus 2, right? And I think you'll often
discover when you see a lot of limit problems that even if
this top factor, if this top expression, is hard to factor,
chances are, one of the things in the denominator that are
making this expression undefined is probably
a factor up here. So sometimes you might get a
more complex thing that isn't as easy to factor as this, but
a good starting point is to guess that one of the factors
is going to be in the bottom expression because that's kind
of the trick of these problems, to just simplify
the expression. So once again, if we assume
that x does not equal 1, and this expression would not be
0 and this would not be 0, then these two could
be canceled out. And we get that this is just
the same thing as the limit as x approaches 1 of x plus 2. Well, now this is pretty easy. What's the limit as x
approaches 1 of x plus 2? Well, you just stick 1 in
there, and you get 3. So it's interesting. When we just tried to
evaluate the expression at x equals 1, we got 0/0. And in the previous example, we
saw that it evaluated out when you simplified it to 0, and in
this example, it came out to 3. And I really encourage you, if
you have a graphing calculator, graph these functions that
we're doing and see and show yourself visually that it's
true, that the limit as you approach, say, x equals 1
actually does approach the limits that were solving for. And make up your own problems. Hell, that's what I'm doing. So you could prove
it to yourself. So let's do another. Let's do one that I think
is pretty interesting. Let's say what's the limit
as x approaches infinity? The limit as x approaches
infinity of, let's say, x squared plus 3 over
x to the third. So the way I think about these
problems as they approach infinity, just think about what
happens when you get really, really, really
large values of x. And kind of a cheating way of
doing this is, if you have a calculator, even if you don't
have a calculator, put in huge numbers here. See what happens when x is a
million, see what happens when x is a billion, see what
happens when x is a trillion, and I think you'll
get the point. You'll see what if there
is a limit here, you'll see what it's going to. But the way I think about it
is, in the numerator, kind of the fastest-growing term here
is the x squared term, right? This is the fastest-growing
term here. In the denominator, what's
the fastest-growing term? Well, in the denominator,
the fastest-growing term is this x to the third. Well, what's going to
grow faster, x to the third or x squared? Well, yeah, x to the third's
going to grow a lot faster than x squared. So this denominator, as you get
larger and larger and larger values of x, is going to grow a
lot faster than that numerator. So you could imagine if the
denominator's growing much, much, much faster than the
numerator, as you get larger and larger numbers, you're
going to get a smaller and smaller and smaller
fraction, right? It's going to approach 0. And so as you go to
infinity, it approaches 0. I know that I kind of just
hand waved, but that's really how you think about it. Another way you could do
it is you could actually divide this fraction. You could actually divide this
rational expression, and you'll get something like 1/x plus
something, something, something, and then you'd also
see, oh, well, the limit as x approaches infinity
of 1/x is also 0. Let's do one more. I'll do this fast so
I can confuse you. The limit as x approaches
infinity of 3x squared plus x over 4x squared minus 5. These problems kind of look
confusing sometimes, but they're really easy. You just have to think about
what happens as you get really large values of x. Well, as you get really large
values of x, these small terms, these ones that don't grow as
fast as these large terms, kind of don't matter anymore,
right, because you're getting really large values of x. And this case, these don't
matter anymore, and then these two x terms grow
at the same pace, right? And they'll always be
kind of growing in this ratio of 3 to 4. So the limit here is
actually that easy. It's 3/4. So what you do is you just
figure out what's the fastest-growing term on the
top, what's the fastest-growing term on the bottom, and then
figure out what it approaches. If they're the same term, then
they kind of cancel out, and you say the limit
approaches 3/4. It's a very nonrigorous way
of doing it, but it gets you the right answer. See you in the next
presentation. 

Transcript for: Limit examples w/ brain malfunction on first prob (part 4) | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
My cousin Nadia is taking a
summer calculus course and she called me last night. And she had some limit
problems and they were excellent problem. So I thought it was worthwhile
to make videos on the problems that she had to figure out. Anyway, so let's do them. If I remember them correctly. I'm doing this on memory. So I hope the answers work out
like they did last night when we were going over
them on the phone. So if I remember correctly,
the first one was the limit as z approaches 2 of x. Oh no. Not that There's no x. It's a z. Of z squared plus 2z minus 8. All of that over z to
the fourth minus 16. So the first thing when you
want to do when you try a limit problem is, well you just try
to substitute the value into Maybe there's no problem when z
equals 2 and you just evaluate the function at z equals 2. If it's a continuous function,
then the limit as z approaches 2 is going to
be the function at 2. But you immediately see a
problem if you put 2 right here 2 to the fourth minus
16 and you get a 0 in the denominator, which is
undefined, so we have to figure out some way
to get around that. And nine times out of 10, when
you see a problem like this, the solution, because both the
numerator and the denominator look factorable, is to factor
the numerator and the denominator. So this is equal to the
limit as z approaches 2. What's the numerator factored? Let's see. Something when you add two
numbers, you get positive 2, and you multiply
them, you get minus 8. So it's probably plus
4 and minus 2, right? So this is going to
be x plus No. Not an x. I'm so conditioned. I'm like a dog. Oh. I can't even undo it anymore. Anyway, well z Actually
let me erase that. I don't want to be messy. Let me erase. I tried to undo it and it
doesn't remember everything. So it's z plus 4
times z minus 2. That's just factoring
a quadratic. And what is this? This has the form a squared
minus b squared, right? So that's going to be But a
squared If this is a squared minus b squared, a would
be z squared, right? So it's z squared plus 4
times z squared minus 4. And then, of course, this
also has the form a squared plus b squared, right? So this will further factor
into z plus 2 times z minus 2. Well, our factoring paid off. We see a term in the numerator
and the denominator that are the same. And not only are they the
same, but they This is the term that was giving
us the problems, right? Because you put a 2 in
here, you got a 0. So let's assume that we're not
evaluating it at z equals 2. And so, for all other
values, we can divide those because those are going
to be the same values. And then what are we left with? This is equal to the limit
and I've change colors arbitrarily as z approaches
2 of z plus 4 over z squared plus 4 times z plus 2. Which is equal what? That's equal to 6 over
what's 2 squared plus 4? Is 8. And then 2 plus 2 is 4. 6 over 12 is equal to 1/2. There you go. I thought that was a pretty
interesting problem. Let's do another one. And this one I found
even more interesting. She gave me It's really
testing my memory to see if I can But I remember
the gist of the problem. So I might not get the exact
numbers she'd given me, but hopefully I get the
exact properties. So it's the limit as x
approaches infinity of the square root of x squared
plus 4x plus 1 minus x. So when you look at this
you're like well let's see. What's happening here? Let's see this. As you go to infinity, this
term will get really big. But then we're taking
the square root of it. And it seems like this term
would overpower this term. And then, so maybe this kind
of converges to x, but then we would subtract an x. So maybe it approaches 0. So that's, at least, that
was my first intuition when I spoke to her. But as we will see, the
intuition here is wrong. And really to do this you
have to know a little bit of a trick. And this trick pays off a lot
whenever you see something with the square root sign, then
subtracting something else, if you want to get rid of
that square root sign. So what we are going to do is
going to multiply Essentially the conjugate we normally
apply to complex numbers. But if we have something like
a plus b, the conjugate is a minus b, right? Or if we have something
like a minus b, the conjugate is a plus b. And the reason why And what
we're going to do is we're going to multiply by
the conjugate of this. And why does Why
is that normal? Why is that useful? Because we have a minus b. If we multiply it times a
plus b, we get a squared minus b squared. Which will make this radical
sign disappear without too much work. So let's do that. Let's multiply by the
conjugate of this thing. But we can't just
multiply it, right? We have to multiply it
by it over itself. Because you can only To not
change the value of something, you can only multiply it by 1. So let's multiply it by the
conjugate: x squared plus 4x plus 1 plus x, right? That's the conjugate, right? Instead of minus x,
we have a plus x. And we can't just
multiply that. We have to multiply it by
1, otherwise we would be changing the value. So it's going to be divided
by the same thing. x squared plus 4x
plus 1 plus x. Let me erase this stuff
down here so we don't get distracted. Don't want to get distracted. And so what do we have? This will become the limit
as x approaches infinity. Well, this is a minus
b times a plus b. So we end up with a squared. Well, what's this squared? That's x squared plus 4x
plus 1 minus b squared. Well what's b squared? Well, b is x. So it's going to be
minus x squared. This is just algebra. Divided by this thing: the
square root of x squared plus 4x plus 1 plus x. So let's see. There's a little
simplification we can do. We can subtract We can
These top two terms cancel out. So x squared minus x squared. And now let's see
what we can do. Well since we're taking x
to infinity, and this is what you normally do what
you take x to infinity. We can divide the numerator
and the denominator by our highest degree term. And in this case, our highest
degree terms is x, right? We have an x here
and an x here. And then when you take And
then, of course, when you divide something like this
by x, and you take it to, infinity, this will approach 0. So let's do that. Let's divide the numerator
and the denominator by x. And remember: anything you do
in the numerator, you have to do in the denominator. Otherwise you're
changing the value. So times 1 over x
over 1 over x. I'm just dividing the numerator
and the denominator by x. So this is equal to the limit
as x approaches infinity of What's That's going to
be 4 plus 1 over x over Let me ask you a question. What is 1 over x
times this thing? What is This is a bit of an
algebra review, but 1 over x. What's 1 over x times x
squared plus 4x plus 1? I'm just doing a little
on the side here. Well if we take the 1 over
x and we put it into the radical sign, it becomes
1 over x squared, right? This is the same thing as
You can say 1 squared over x squared, but
1 over x squared. You could say 1 squared. You could put a square there,
but Times x squared plus 4x plus 1. And that should make
sense to you, right? Because if we started with
this, we could easily just take the square root of
this and take it outside. And the square root
of this is 1 over x. I'm just going in the
other direction, right? So, assuming you're comfortable
with that, everything under the radical sign. Even though we're actually
dividing by 1 over x, since we're going into the radical
sign, we're actually dividing by x squared. So it becomes this is the
radical sign x squared divided by x squared
is 1, right? I hope you understand why we're
dividing by x squared here. We're actually
dividing by 1 over x. But when you put it under the
radical sign, it becomes 1 over x squared. Let me put it this way. 1 over x times the
square root of a. That's the same thing. That equals the square
root of 1 squared over x squared times a, right? And this is just 1
over x squared. So that's the property, or the
algebra that we're using. So anyway, we divide all
of this by x squared. So that becomes a 1 plus 4
over x plus 1 over x squared. And then, of course, we divide
this one by This term right here, we divide by x, right? Because it's not in
the radical sign. So that just becomes a 1. So now what's the limit as
x approaches infinity? Well as x approaches infinity,
this term right here goes to 0, right? 1 over infinity is 0. This term right here goes to 0. This term right here goes to 0. And so what are we left with? This is equal to 4 over the
square root of 1 plus 1. Well that's just 1. So that equals 4 over 2,
which is equal to 2. There you go. Now let's do one more problem. This is the third
one she'd given me. In it, we had to kind of brush
off our trig identities. And really these harder limit
problems, they're all about kind of knowing your algebra
and your trigonometry really well. Just so you know how to
manipulate these functions. Because the limit part You
just have to get it into a form where taking the limit is
fairly straightforward. So let's do that trig problem. Clear image. Invert colors. So it was the limit
as x approaches 0 of cotangent of 2x. Was that it? Yeah. It was cotangent of 2x
over the cosecant of x. And this one, just like
previous problems, more than knowing your pre-calculus or
your calculus, you need to know your trig identities. So cosecant of x. That's just 1 over sine. I remember that by saying
it's not intuitive. You would have thought that the
cosecant is 1 over cosine. But it's not. It's 1 over sine. So I remember that
it's not intuitive. And cotangent of 2x is equal
to 1 over tangent of 2x. And tangent is sine over
cosine, so cotangent's the opposite. And so that equals cosine of
2x over sine of 2x, right? OK. So what is this equal to? So this is going to be the
limit as x approaches 0. Cotangent of 2x, we said, was
cosine of 2x over sine of 2x. And then it's going to be all
of that over the cosecant of x. Well that's just 1
over sine of x. Well if you divide by 1 over
sine of x, that's the same thing as multiplying
by sine of x. So we have What do we have? We have cosine Well we have
sine of x times cosine of 2x. All of that divided
by sine of 2x. Just doing a little arithmetic. And we have a
problem here still. Because when you take x
approaches 0, this term right here goes to 0 and we have a 0
in the denominator, which is just not acceptable. Because it's undefined. And that's the whole reason
why we're doing this limit to begin with. And actually that's the first
thing you should have done. You should have tried to put it
and you would have seen that you would've gotten a 0 value
in the denominator and it would have been unevaluatable. Right. Because really, this is
just We haven't even done any manipulation yet. This is the same thing as this. And if you put the 0 right
here, you get undefined. So what can we do? Well this is where your
break out the trig or you brush off your memory. What is the sine of 2x equal? And this is your double One
of the double angle formulas. Sine of 2x is equal to 2
sine of x cosine of x. So if you know that, then
you've gone a long way because then it becomes pretty
simple to simplify. So it becomes 2 sine
of x cosine of x. And if we assume that x isn't
0, it's just approaching 0, we can divide the numerator and
the denominator by sine of x. And what are we left with? We're left with the limit as
x approaches 0 of cosine of 2x over 2 cosine of x. Well what's cosine of 0? Cosine of 0 is 1, right? So cosine of 2 times 0,
which is 0, that's also 1. So that is equal to 1 over
right, cosine of 0 is 1 over 2 times 1. So it equals 1/2. There you go. I think those are three
fairly meaty limit problems. And if you know that, you're
probably prepared for something that your calculus teacher
might throw at you. See you in a future video. 

Transcript for: Squeeze theorem (sandwich theorem) | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In this video I will prove
to you that the limit as x approaches 0 of sine of
x over x is equal to 1. But before I do that, before I
break into trigonometry, I'm going to go over another
aspect of limits. And that's the squeeze theorem. Because once you understand
what the squeeze theorem is, we can use the squeeze
theorem to prove this. It's actually a pretty involved
explanation, but I think you'll find it pretty neat and
satisfying if you get it. If you don't get it, maybe you
just want to memorize this. Because that's a very useful
limit to know later on when we take the derivatives
of trig functions. So what's the squeeze theorem? The squeeze theorem is
my favorite theorem in mathematics, possibly because
it has the word squeeze in it. Squeeze theorem. And when you read it in a
calculus book it looks all complicated. I don't know when you read
it, in a calculus book or in a precalculus book. It looks all complicated,
but what it's saying is frankly pretty obvious. Let me give you an example. If I told you that I
always so Sal always eats more than Umama. Umama is my wife. If I told you that this
is true, Sal always eats more than Umama. And I were also to say that Sal
always eats less than I don't know, let me make up a
fictional character than Bill. So on any given day let's
say this is in a given day. Sal always eats more than Umama
in any given day, and Sal always eats less than
Bill on any given day. Now if I were tell you that on
Tuesday Umama ate 300 calories and on Tuesday Bill
ate 300 calories. So my question to you is, how
many calories did Sal eat, or did I eat, on Tuesday? Well I always eat more than
Umama well, more than or equal to Umama and I always
eat less than or equal to Bill. So then on Tuesday, I must
have eaten 300 calories. So this is the gist of the
squeeze theorem, and I'll do a little bit more formally. But it's essentially saying, if
I'm always greater than one thing and I'm always less than
another thing and at some point those two things are equal,
well then I must be equal to whatever those two
things are equal to. I've kind of been squeezed
in between them. I'm always in between Umama and
Bill, and if they're at the exact same point on
Tuesday, then I must be at that point as well. Or at least I must approach it. So let me write it
in math terms. So all it says is that, over
some domain, if I say that, let's say that g of x is less
than or equal to f of x, which is less than or equal to
h of x over some domain. And we also know that the limit
of g of x as x approaches a is equal to some limit, capital L,
and we also know that the limit as x approaches a of h of x
also equals L, then the squeeze theorem tells us and I'm not
going to prove that right here, but it's good to just
understand what the squeeze theorem is the squeeze
theorem tells us then the limit as x approaches a of f of x
must also be equal to L. And this is the same thing. This is example where f of x,
this could be how much Sal eats in a day, this could be how
much Umama eats in a day, this is Bill. So I always eat more than
Umama or less than Bill. And then on Tuesday, you could
say a is Tuesday, if Umama had 300 calories and Bill had 300
calories, then I also had to eat 300 calories. Let me let me graph
that for you. Let me graph that, and I'll
do it in a different color. Squeeze theorem. Squeeze theorem. OK, so let's draw the
point a comma L. The point a comma L. Let's say this is a, that's
the point that we care about. a, and this is L. And we know, g of x, that's
the lower function, right? So let's say that this
green thing right here, this is g of x. So this is my g of x. And we know that as g of x
approaches so the g of x could look something
like that, right? And we know that the limit
as x approaches a of g of x is equal to L. So that's right there. So this is g of x. That's g of x. Let me do h of x in
a different color. So now h of x could look
something like this. Like that. So that's h of x. And we also know that the limit
as x approaches a of h of x  let's see, this is the
function of x axis. So you can call it h of
x, g of x, or f of x. That's just the dependent
access, and this is the x-axis. So once again, the limit as x
approaches a of h of x, well at that point right there,
h of a is equal to L. Or at least the limit
is equal to that. And none of these functions
actually have to even be defined at a, as long as these
limits, this limit exists and this limit exists. And that's also an important
thing to keep in mind. So what does this tell us?
f of x is always greater than this green function. It's always less
than h of x, right? So any f of x I draw,
it would have to be in between those two, right? So no matter how I draw it, if
I were to draw a function, it's bounded by those two
functions just by definition. So it has to go
through that point. Or at least it has to
approach that point. Maybe it's not defined at that
point, but the limit as we approach a of f of x also
has to be at point L. And maybe f of x doesn't have
to be defined right there, but the limit as we approach
it is going to be L. And hopefully that makes a
little bit of sense, and hopefully my calories
example made a little bit of sense to you. So let's keep that in
the back of our mind, the squeeze theorem. And now we will use that to
prove that the limit as x approaches 0 of sine of
x over x is equal to 1. And I want to do that,
one, because this is a super useful limit. And then the other thing is,
sometimes you learn the squeeze theorem, you're like, oh, well
that's obvious but when is it useful? And we'll see. Actually I'm going to do it in
the next video, since we're already pushing 8 minutes. But we'll see in the next video
that the squeeze theorem is tremendously useful when
we're trying to prove this. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Proof: lim (sin x)/x | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Now that we have hopefully a
decent understanding of the squeeze theorem, we'll use that
to prove that the limit I'll do it in yellow the limit as
x approaches 0 of sine of x over x is equal to 1. And you must be bubbling over
with anticipation now, because I've said this so many times. So let's do it, and actually,
we have to go with obviously, they got our trigonometry and
it's actually a visual proof. So let me draw at least the
first and fourth quadrants of the unit circle. I'll do that in magenta. Let's see, let me see
if I can I should draw it pretty big. Let me see. I should draw it
like quite big. So I'll draw it like that. That's close enough. And then let me draw the axis. So this is the x-axis, would
look something like that. Sorry, that's the y-axis. There you go. And then the x-axis,
something like that. That's our unit circle. There you go. Now let me draw a couple
of other things. Let me draw a well, it is
a radius, but I'm going to go beyond the unit circle. So let's go like right there. Draw a couple of more things,
just to set up this problem. Nope, that's not what
I wanted to do. I wanted to do it right
from this point. Right like that. And then right from this
point, I want to do this. And then I want to draw another
right from that point. I'm going to do that. And now we are ready to go. So what did I say? This is the unit circle, right? So if that's the unit
circle, what does it mean? It's a circle with
a radius of 1. So the distance from
here to here is 1. And now if this is an angle x
in radians, what's the length of this line right here? What's the length of that line? Well, by definition, sine
of x is defined to be the y-coordinate of any point
on the unit circle. So this is sine of x. I'm going to run out of space,
so let me draw an arrow. So this is that right
there is sine of x. Now let me ask you a
slightly harder one. What's this length right here? Well, let's think about it. What is tangent? Let's go back to our SOHCAHTOA
definition of tangent. TOA. Tangent is equal to TOA:
opposite over adjacent. So what is a tangent of x? Well, it would be equal to we
could take this if we say that this is the right
triangle, it would be this length the opposite
over the adjacent, right? So let's call this length
over here, let's call this o for opposite. But what's the adjacent length? What's this base of
this larger triangle? Well, it's the unit
circle, right? So the distance from here
to here that distance is also going to be 1, right? Because it's just
a radius again. That's 1. So opposite over adjacent is
equal to the tangent of x. But opposite over adjacent
adjacent is just 1, right? So the opposite side, this side
right here, it's going to be equal to the tangent of x. Or another way of saying it,
tangent of x is equal to this side over 1, or tangent of
x is equal to this side. So let me write that down. That side is equal to
the tangent of x. Now, let's think about the area
of a couple of parts of this figure that I've drawn here. Maybe I should have drawn it
a little bigger, but I think we'll be able to do it. So first let me pick a
relatively small triangle. So let's do this
triangle right here. I'll trace it in green. So this triangle that I'm
tracing in green what is the area of that triangle? Well, that's going to be 1/2
times base times height. So it's 1/2 times the
base, which is 1. Right? It's this whole triangle. And then what's
the height of it? Well, we just figured out that
this height right here, that this height is sine of x. Times sine of x. So that's this green
triangle here, right? Now, what is the area of
not that green triangle. Let me do it in another color. Let me do it in oh,
I'll do it in red. What is the area of this pi? This pi right here. That pi. Hope you see well, that's
not a different enough color. So, this pi right here. Or I'm going there. And then I'm going on the arc. So it's a little bit bigger
than the triangle we just figured out, right? It's always going to be a
little bit bigger, because it includes this area between that
triangle and the arc, right? What is the area of that arc? Well, if this angle is x it's
x radians what fraction of that is out of the
entire unit circle? Well, there are 2 pi radians in
a total unit circle, right? So this area right here is
going to be equal to what? It's going to be equal to the
fraction x is of the total radians in the unit
circle, right? So it's x radians over
2 pi radians in the entire unit circle. So that's kind of the fraction
that this is of you know, if you did it in degrees the
fraction that this is over 360 degrees, times the area of
the whole circle, right? This tells us what fraction we
are of the circle, and we're going to want to multiply that
times the area of the whole circle. Well, what's the area
of the whole circle? Well, area is pi r squared,
the radius is 1, right? So the area of the entire
circle is just pi. Pi r squared, r is 1, so the
area of the circle so the area of this wedge right here,
is just going to be equal to these pi's cancel out
it's equal to x over 2. So that first small triangle,
that green triangle we did, is sine of x. 1/2 sine of x, that's the
area of that green triangle. Then the slightly larger area
of this wedge is we figured out just now is x over 2. And now let's take the area
of that larger triangle, of this big triangle here. And that may be
the most obvious. So 1/2 base times height. So that's 1/2 the base
is 1 again 1 times the height, is tangent of x. Equal to 1/2 tangent of x. Now, it should be clear just
looking at this diagram, no matter where I drew this top
line, that this green triangle has a smaller area than this
wedge, which has a smaller area than this large triangle. Right? So let's write an
inequality that says that. The green triangle the area
of the green triangle so 1/2 the sine of x, that's the area
of the green triangle it's less than the area
of this wedge. So that's x over 2. And they're both less than
the area of this large triangle, right? Which is 1/2 tangent of x. Now when is this true? This is true as long as we're
in the first quadrant, right? As long as we're in
the first quadrant. It's also almost true if we go
into the fourth quadrant, except then the sine of x
becomes negative, the tangent of x becomes negative,
and x becomes negative. But if we take the absolute
value of everything, it still holds in the fourth quadrant. Because if you go negative, as
long as we take the absolute value, then the distance will
still hold and we still have positive areas and all
that kind of thing. So since my goal is to take the
limit as x approaches 0, and I want to take the limit in
order for this limit to be defined in general, it has to
be true from both the positive and the negative side. Let's take the absolute value
of both sides of this. And hopefully this
makes sense to you. If I were to draw the line down
here and this would be the sine of x, and that would be
the tangent of x as long as you took the absolute value of
everything, you're essentially just doing the same thing
as in the first quadrant. So let's take the absolute
value of everything. And that shouldn't change
anything, especially if you're in the first quadrant. And you might want to think
about it a little bit, why it doesn't change anything
in the second quadrant. So we have this inequality. Let's see if we can
play around with this. So first of all, let's just
multiply everything by 2 and get rid of the 1/2's. So we get absolute value of
sine of x is less than absolute value of x, which is less than
the absolute value of the tangent of x. I hope I didn't confuse you by
taking the absolute value. That original inequality I
wrote was completely valid in the first quadrant, but since I
want this inequality to be true in the first and fourth
quadrants, because I'm taking the limit as x approaches 0
from both sides, I put that absolute value there. So you could draw the line down
there and do everything we did up there in the fourth
quadrant, but just take the absolute value and it
should work out the same. Anyway, back to the problem. So we have this inequality. And I'm running out of
space, so let me erase some of this stuff up here. Erase. Erase. Nope, that doesn't erase. OK. That should erase. OK. So we could erase everything
that took us so far. We can't forget this though. This gives a lot of space. OK. So let's take this, and let's
take that expression, and divide all of the sides. You know, and it has
three sides, a left, middle, and right. Let's divide them all by the
absolute value of sine of x. And since we know that the
absolute value of sine of x is a positive number, we know that
these less than signs don't change, right? So let's do that. So the absolute value of the
sine of x divided by the absolute value of the sine
of x, well, that equals 1. Which is less than the absolute
value of x divided by the absolute value of sine of x. Which is less than what's the
absolute value of tan so, all I'm doing is I'm taking the
absolute value of sine of x, absolute value of sine of x,
absolute value of sine of x. So what's the absolute value of
the tangent of x divided by the absolute value of
the sine of x? Well, tangent is just
sine over cosine. So that's equal to so, just
do this part right here. That's equal to sine over
cosine divided by sine. And you know, you could say
that that's the same thing as the absolute value. And the absolute value divided
by the absolute value. So what are you left with? Well, you're just left with 1
over this cancels out with this, that becomes a 1 1
over the absolute value of the cosine of x. So you might feel
we're getting close. Because this looks a lot like
this, it's just inverted. So to get to this,
let's invert it. And to invert it, what happens? Well, first of all, what
happens when you invert 1? Well, 1/1 is just 1. But when you invert both sides
of an inequality, you switch the inequality, right? And if that doesn't make sense
to you, think about this. You know, if I say 1/2 is less
than 2, and I invert both sides of that, I get 2 is
greater than 1/2. So that hopefully gives
you a little intuition. So if I'm inverting all of the
sides of this inequality, I have to switch the
inequality signs. So 1 is greater than absolute
value of sine of x, over the absolute value of x, which is
greater than absolute value of cosine of x. Now let me ask you a question. The absolute value of sine
of x over well, first of all, sine of x over x. Will there ever be a time when
sine of x over x is in the first or the fourth quadrant
is there ever a time that sine of x over x is a
negative expression? Well, in the first quadrant,
sine of x is positive, and x is positive. So a positive divided
by a positive is going to be positive. And in the fourth quadrant,
sine of x is negative, y is negative, and the angle is
negative, so x is also negative. So in the fourth quadrant, sine
of x over x is going to be a negative divided by a negative. So it's going to be
a positive again. So sine of x over x is always
going to be a positive. So the absolute value signs
are kind of redundant. So we could write 1 is greater
than sine of x over x. And the same logic, in the
first and fourth quadrants and that's where
we're dealing with. We're dealing with minus pi
over 2 is less than x, which is less than pi over 2. So we're going from
minus pi over 2 all the way to pi over 2. So we're in the fourth
and first quadrant. Is cosine of x ever negative? Well, cosine is the x value,
and the x by definition, in the first and fourth
quadrants the x value is always positive. So if this is always positive,
we can get rid of the absolute value signs there,
and just write that. And now, we are ready to
use the squeeze theorem. Let me erase all of
this down here now. So let me ask you a question. What is the limit, as
x approaches 0, of the function 1? Well, the function 1
is always equal to 1. So I can set the limit as x
approaches infinity, the limit as x approaches pi, anything. This is always going
to be equal to 1. So as x approaches 0,
this is equal to 1. And then what is the limit, as
x approaches 0, of cosine of x? Well, that's easy, too. As x approaches 0, cosine of 0
is just 1 and as you get, you know, it's a continuous
function so the limit is 1. So we are ready to use
the squeeze theorem. As we approach 0, as
x approaches 0, this function approaches 1. This function approaches 1. And this function, this
expression, is in between the two. And if it's in between the two,
as we approach this is approaching 1 as we approach 0,
this is approaching 1 as we approach 0, and this is in
between them, so it also has to approach 1 as we approach 0. And so we are using the squeeze
theorem based on this and this. And you could say, you know,
therefore by the squeeze theorem, because this is true,
this is true, and this is true, sine of x over x, the limit as
x approaches 0, is equal to 1. So hopefully that gave
you the intuition. That another way to view it, as
this line gets smaller and smaller as it approaches 0, as
x approaches zero, that this area and this area converge, so
the area in between kind of has to converge to the
both of them. And if you want to see
it graphically, I've graphed it here. Let me see if I can
graph this thing. I'll show you the graph. Just so you believe me. So we said that 1 is always
greater than sine of x, which is always greater than cosine
of x, between negative pi over 2 and pi over 2. And of course, this isn't
defined at x is equal to 0. But we can figure
out the limit. So there we have it. This blue line right here,
that's the function 1. That's y is equal to 1. This light blue line right
here is cosine of x. And this is the graph
of sine of x over x. And you can see that I
actually typed it in. So sine of x over x, between
negative pi over 2 and pi over 2, or the fourth and the first
quadrants, the red line is always in between. It's always in between the dark
blue and the light blue line. And so this is just an
intuition of what happens with the squeeze theorem. We know that the limit,
as this light blue line approaches 0, is 1. And we know the limit as
this top dark blue line approaches 0 is 1. And this red line is always
in between it, so it also approaches 1. So there you have it. The proof, using the squeeze
theorem, and a little bit of visual trigonometry, of why the
limit, as x approaches 0, of sine of x over x is equal to 1. I hope I haven't confused you. 

Transcript for: More limits | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I've been asked to do some
more limit problems. So let's do some more. So let's see. What's the first
problem I have? It says the limit as x
approaches 0 of x minus 2 times the absolute value of x over
the absolute value of x. Now what immediately confuses
most people is this absolute value thing. Because how do you
deal with it? Because you can't
just subtract. If this was an x, it would
be a simple problem. Because then you could
just simplify it. You could subtract this 2x from
this x and then divide by x. And you'd get an answer. But this has an absolute
value, so you can't just directly manipulate it. Well what if we're able to get
rid of this absolute value? How do we do that? Well, in order for this limit
to exist in order for this limit I don't know. Let's say it equals l, right? And l is what we
have to solve for. In order for that limit to
exist, then the limit to x approaches 0 also has to
exist from the positive and the negative sides. What do I mean? Well that means that
this must also be true. The limit as x approaches 0
from the right-hand side, from positive numbers, of x minus 2
times the absolute value of x over the absolute value of
x has to be equal to l. And then we also know that the
limit as x approaches 0 from the negative side of the same
function, 2 times absolute value of x over the absolute
value of x, is also going to be equal to l, right? If this If we As we
approach 0 from the left, we get some number. And as we approach 0 from the
right, we get the same number, then we know that no matter
what direction we approach 0 from, which is this situation,
we approach that number. So let's figure out
these two limits. And if they have the same
answer, then we have the answer to our original problem. So how can we simplify this
as x approaches 0 from the positive side? Well that's the same thing as
the limit as x approaches 0 from the positive side. Well if we know we're
approaching 0 from the positive side, what do we know about x? We know that x is
positive, right? It's approaching
from the right. So if x is positive, we
can get rid of these absolute value signs. So we just get x
minus 2x over x. And so that equals the limit
as x approaches 0 from the positive side. Let's see. That's x minus 2x. This is minus x, right? x minus x. And then minus x divided
by x is minus 1. So the limit as x approaches
0 from the positive side of minus 1. Well that's just going
to equal minus 1. OK. Now let's take this case down
here when we're approaching from the negative side. So how can we think about this? What is the absolute value of
x if x is a negative number? Well the absolute value of x,
if x is a negative number, is going to be the
negative of x, right? If x Think of it this way: if
x is negative 1, when we take the absolute value of x, we're
essentially just multiplying x times negative 1 again. So another way to rewrite this
is: this is equal to the limit as x approaches 0 from
the negative side of x minus 2 times what? The absolute value of x is the
same thing as negative x. Hopefully that makes
sense to you, right? If we're dealing with negative
numbers, then taking the absolute value of a negative
number is the same thing as multiplying that negative
number times the negative to essentially make it into a
positive number, right? And then, of course, the
absolute value of x in the denominator, since we're
dealing with a negative number, is also equal to negative x. And let's see if we
can simplify that. So that means that the limit
as x approaches 0 from the negative side Let's see. I get x minus 2
times negative x. So these negatives cancel out. So I get x plus 2x, right? So I get 3x over minus x. That equals minus 3. So this is interesting. I am approaching a different
number when I approach it from the left-hand side. When I approached this function
from the left-hand side or from the right-hand side. So it looks like this
limit doesn't exist. Let's confirm that. Let me actually Let me see if
I can Let me get the graphing calculator and confirm. Let me type it in. So x minus I'll show you
what I'm doing x so you don't get bored minus
absolute value of x. And what am I Divided by
the absolute value of x. Let's see. Graph. And what does it have here? Zoom out. So this is Is this right? x minus the absolute
value of x Oh, sorry. It's x minus 2 times the
absolute value of x. Graph. There you go. Even the oh. I don't think you
can see it yet. the graphing calculator
confirms the work we did. Although it connects them and
it makes you think the it somehow approaches here. But that's just because
it picks points and just plots them. So as you see, as you approach
from the right-hand side, you approach negative 1, right? Well actually you're at
negative 1 the whole time on the right-hand side. And as you approach from
the left-hand side, you approach negative 3. So the limit does not
exist at x is equal 0. You would say l is undefined. You know, there's a little
dirty secret about limits. It's not a dirty secret, but
in theory you should never get a limit problem wrong. And why? Well you should be able to
solve it analytically. But if you don't know how to
solve it analytically, just put it really really
small numbers here. Try out If you put
in Try 0.0001. Try numbers that are just
slightly larger then whatever your limit number is. And then slightly smaller. And then, just numerically, if
you have a calculator, see what it's approaching. And sometimes you don't
even need a calculator. You could probably calculate
this in your head with 0.01 or something like that. Anyway, let's do
another problem. Invert colors. OK. So let's do the limit
as x approaches 0 of sine of 5x over 2x. Now this looks a lot
like sine of x over x. And we know sine of x over x. What is that? And if you don't believe me,
watch the videos where we prove it using the squeeze theorem. We proved that the limit as
x approaches 0 of sine of x over x is equal to 1. Now this looks
almost like that. It would be great if we
could get it into that form and then we'd be done. So how can we do that? Well let's try to substitute. Let's try to get a single
variable here instead of a 5 times a variable. So let's make a
substitution in magenta. And say that a is equal to 5x. And then that also means that
So divide both sides by 5 and we get x is equal to a over 5. So let's make that
substitution and do this. So this The limit as x
approaches 0 would be the same thing as what? If approaches As x approaches
0 here, a is also going to approach 0, right? So this is the same thing as
the limit as a approaches 0. Or you could view it this
way: as a approaches 0, x is still approaching 0. Maybe at 1/5 the pace,
but it's the same thing. [SIDE COMMENTS] OK. Anyway, this should say the
limit is a approaches 0, right? And hopefully you're satisfied
that the limit as a approaches 0 is the same That x is
still approaching 0, right? Because if a approaches
0 here, that's going to make x approach 0. So it's the limit as a
approaches 0 of sine of a over 2 times x. But x is a over 5. So it's 2 times a over 5. And so that is equal to the
limit as a approaches 0 of sine of a over 2/5 a. Well that's the same thing. We could take this out. We could take this 1 over
2/5 right, it's in the denominator out. This is just a constant
term, so we can take it out of the limit. And obviously if we're taking
it out of the denominator, it flips, right? Because this is just
1 over 2/5 or 5/2. So that equals 5/2 right, I
just took this out of the denominator and it flips,
right, because it's 1 over 2/5 times the limit as
a approaches 0 of sine of a over a. And now that looks an
awful lot like this. It's just we have an a instead
of an x, but that doesn't make a difference. So this is equal to 1. So this whole thing, since this
is equal to 1, is equal to 5/2. And, once again, if you get
this answer and you're not so sure, take your calculator
out and try calculate. What is the sine
of 5 times 0.001? So sine of 0.005 divided by
2 times 0.001, so 0.002. If you take that, you're going
to get a number that's awfully close to this number. This is approximate. This is exactly 2.5. You're probably going
to get like 2.49999 or something like that. So let's do another one. OK. So I have the limit as x
approaches 0 this one looks a lot like the previous one,
although we have some exponents here of sine squared
of x over x squared. And that almost looks like
sine of x over x, but I have these squared terms. What can I do? Well this is the same thing. This is sine of x
squared over x squared. So this is the same thing as
the limit as x approaches 0 of sine of x over
x squared, right? If you were to take this out,
you'd square the numerator, square the denominator,
and you'd get this. If you took If you
wanted to change this. I won't say simplify. Well now this is interesting. Well this 2 is This
is a constant term. This isn't going to
change with the limit. So essentially, we can say,
well this is going to be equal to the limit as x approaches 0
of sine of x over x, the whole thing squared. And how is that? I couldn't have done this if
there was an x here, right, because that would have
changed the limit. But this is a constant term. So this The base is the only
thing that's going to change as I take as x approaches 0. So I can take the limit
within the base, I guess you could say, and get here. And now we're back to what we
proved in a previous video. What is the limit as
x approaches 0 of sine of x over x? Right. It's 1. So what's 1 squared? It is 1. There you go. And I've taken 13
minutes of your time. Hopefully you've found
it vaguely Useful. 

Transcript for: Epsilon-delta limit definition 1 | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let me draw a function
that would be interesting to take a limit of. And I'll just draw it visually
for now, and we'll do some specific examples
a little later. So that's my y-axis,
and that's my x-axis. And let;s say the function
looks something like I'll make it a fairly
straightforward function let's say it's a line,
for the most part. Let's say it looks just
like, accept it has a hole at some point. x is equal to a, so
it's undefined there. Let me black that point
out so you can see that it's not defined there. And that point there
is x is equal to a. This is the x-axis, this is
the y is equal f of x-axis. Let's just say
that's the y-axis. And let's say that this
is f of x, or this is y is equal to f of x. Now we've done a bunch
of videos on limits. I think you have an
intuition on this. If I were to say what is the
limit as x approaches a, and let's say that this
point right here is l. We know from our previous
videos that well first of all I could write it down the
limit as x approaches a of f of x. What this means intuitively is
as we approach a from either side, as we approach it from
that side, what does f of x approach? So when x is here,
f of x is here. When x is here, f
of x is there. And we see that it's
approaching this l right there. And when we approach a from
that side and we've done limits where you approach from
only the left or right side, but to actually have a limit it
has to approach the same thing from the positive direction and
the negative direction but as you go from there, if you pick
this x, then this is f of x. f of x is right there. If x gets here then it goes
here, and as we get closer and closer to a, f of x approaches
this point l, or this value l. So we say that the limit
of f of x ax x approaches a is equal to l. I think we have that intuition. But this was not very, it's
actually not rigorous at all in terms of being specific
in terms of what we mean is a limit. All I said so far is as
we get closer, what does f of x get closer to? So in this video I'll attempt
to explain to you a definition of a limit that has a little
bit more, or actually a lot more, mathematical rigor than
just saying you know, as x gets closer to this value, what
does f of x get closer to? And the way I think about it's:
kind of like a little game. The definition is, this
statement right here means that I can always give you a range
about this point and when I talk about range I'm not
talking about it in the whole domain range aspect, I'm just
talking about a range like you know, I can give you a distance
from a as long as I'm no further than that, I can
guarantee you that f of x is go it not going to be any further
than a given distance from l and the way I think about it
is, it could be viewed as a little game. Let's say you say, OK Sal,
I don't believe you. I want to see you know, whether
f of x can get within 0.5 of l. So let's say you give me 0.5
and you say Sal, by this definition you should always
be able to give me a range around a that will get f of
x within 0.5 of l, right? So the values of f of x are
always going to be right in this range, right there. And as long as I'm in that
range around a, as long as I'm the range around you give me, f
of x will always be at least that close to our limit point. Let me draw it a little bit
bigger, just because I think I'm just overriding the same
diagram over and over again. So let's say that this is f of
x, this is the hole point. There doesn't have to be a hole
there; the limit could equal actually a value of the
function, but the limit is more interesting when the function
isn't defined there but the limit is. So this point right here that
is, let me draw the axes again. So that's x-axis, y-axis x,
y, this is the limit point l, this is the point a. So the definition of the limit,
and I'll go back to this in second because now that it's
bigger I want explain it again. It says this means and this
is the epsilon delta definition of limits, and we'll touch on
epsilon and delta in a second, is I can guarantee you that
f of x, you give me any distance from l you want. And actually let's
call that epsilon. And let's just hit on
the definition right from the get go. So you say I want to be no more
than epsilon away from l. And epsilon can just be any
number greater, any real number, greater than 0. So that would be, this distance
right here is epsilon. This distance there is epsilon. And for any epsilon you give
me, any real number so this is, this would be l plus
epsilon right here, this would be l minus epsilon right here
the epsilon delta definition of this says that no matter
what epsilon one you give me, I can always specify a
distance around a. And I'll call that delta. I can always specify
a distance around a. So let's say this is delta
less than a, and this is delta more than a. This is the letter delta. Where as long as you pick an x
that's within a plus delta and a minus delta, as long as the x
is within here, I can guarantee you that the f of x, the
corresponding f of x is going to be within your range. And if you think about it
this makes sense right? It's essentially saying, I can
get you as close as you want to this limit point just by and
when I say as close as you want, you define what you want
by giving me an epsilon; on it's a little bit of a game
and I can get you as close as you want to that limit point by
giving you a range around the point that x is approaching. And as long as you pick an x
value that's within this range around a, long as you pick an x
value around there, I can guarantee you that f of x will
be within the range you specify. Just make this a little bit
more concrete, let's say you say, I want f of x to be within
0.5 let's just you know, make everything concrete numbers. Let's say this is the number 2
and let's say this is number 1. So we're saying that the limit
as x approaches 1 of f of x I haven't defined f of x, but it
looks like a line with the hole right there, is equal to 2. This means that you can
give me any number. Let's say you want to try it
out for a couple of examples. Let's say you say I want f of x
to be within point let me do a different color I want f
of x to be within 0.5 of 2. I want f of x to be
between 2.5 and 1.5. Then I could say, OK, as long
as you pick an x within I don't know, it could be
arbitrarily close but as long as you pick an x that's let's
say it works for this function that's between, I don't
know, 0.9 and 1.1. So in this case the delta from
our limit point is only 0.1. As long as you pick an x that's
within 0.1 of this point, or 1, I can guarantee you that your
f of x is going to lie in that range. So hopefully you get a little
bit of a sense of that. Let me define that with the
actual epsilon delta, and this is what you'll actually see in
your mat textbook, and then we'll do a couple of examples. And just to be clear, that
was just a specific example. You gave me one epsilon and I
gave you a delta that worked. But by definition if this is
true, or if someone writes this, they're saying it doesn't
just work for one specific instance, it works for
any number you give me. You can say I want to be within
one millionth of, you know, or ten to the negative hundredth
power of 2, you know, super close to 2, and I can always
give you a range around this point where as long as you pick
an x in that range, f of x will always be within this range
that you specify, within that were you know, one trillionth
of a unit away from the limit point. And of course, the one thing
I can't guarantee is what happens when x is equal to a. I'm just saying as long as you
pick an x that's within my range but not on a, it'll work. Your f of x will show up to be
within the range you specify. And just to make the math
clear because I've been speaking only in words so far
and this is what we see the textbook: it says look, you
give me any epsilon greater than 0. Anyway, this is a
definition, right? If someone writes this they
mean that you can give them any epsilon greater than 0, and
then they'll give you a delta remember your epsilon is how
close you want f of x to be to your limit point, right? It's a range around f of x
they'll give you a delta which is a range
around a, right? Let me write this. So limit as approaches a
of f of x is equal to l. So they'll give you a delta
where as long as x is no more than delta So the distance
between x and a, so if we pick an x here let me do another
color if we pick an x here, the distance between that value
and a, as long as one, that's greater than 0 so that x
doesn't show up on top of a, because its function might be
undefined at that point. But as long as the distance
between x and a is greater than 0 and less than this x
range that they gave you, it's less than delta. So as long as you take an x,
you know if I were to zoom the x-axis right here this is a
and so this distance right here would be delta, and this
distance right here would be delta as long as you pick an
x value that falls here so as long as you pick that x value
or this x value or this x value as long as you pick one of
those x values, I can guarantee you that the distance between
your function and the limit point, so the distance between
you know, when you take one of these x values and you evaluate
f of x at that point, that the distance between that f of x
and the limit point is going to be less than the
number you gave them. And if you think of, it seems
very complicated, and I have mixed feelings about where
this is included in most calculus curriculums. It's included in like the, you
know, the third week before you even learn derivatives, and
it's kind of this very mathy and rigorous thing to think
about, and you know, it tends to derail a lot of students and
a lot of people I don't think get a lot of the intuition
behind it, but it is mathematically rigorous. And I think it is very valuable
once you study you know, more advanced calculus or
become a math major. But with that said, this
does make a lot of sense intuitively, right? Because before we were talking
about, look you know, I can get you as close as x approaches
this value f of x is going to approach this value. And the way we mathematically
define it is, you say Sal, I want to be super close. I want the distance to be
f of x [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. And I want it to be
0.000000001, then I can always give you a distance around x
where this will be true. And I'm all out of
time in this video. In the next video I'll do some
examples where I prove the limits, where I prove some
limit statements using this definition. And hopefully you know, when we
use some tangible numbers, this definition will make a
little bit more sense. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Epsilon-delta limit definition 2 | Limits | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
It is not unusual in calculus
textbooks to see something to see problems along the lines
of, prove that the limit as x approaches I don't know,
say, as x approaches 1. Let me think of an interesting
function when x approaches 1. Let's see. 3x times x minus 1
over x minus 1. And you might say, hey Sal, why
did you do this x minus 1 in the numerator and denominator? Well, I did that because
obviously you can't have a 0 down here. So this function is actually
not defined as x is equal to 1, right? If I had just put a 3x,
this cancels out for all the other values. So this is essentially the
line 3x, except it has a hole at x is equal to 1. And that's why I did it. Because I want to take the
limit, and it's interesting to take a limit a to a point where
the function doesn't exist. But the books will say, hey,
prove that this limit is equal to well, it would actually
be equal to 3, right? Prove that. And you essentially have
to use the epsilon delta definition of a limit. So to prove this, you're
essentially proving what this means. And this means proving
this is the same thing as proving so you could
just prove that given. So if you give me some epsilon
greater than 0 and remember, that's how close you want f
of x to get to the limit. Given some epsilon greater than
0, in order for this to be true, I need to prove that I
can give you that there exists that, you know, I can
give you a delta greater than 0. Where as long as the distance
between x and our limit point, x and 1, is less than delta
remember, we don't want x to ever get right on top
of the limit point. Because a function might
not be defined there. So the distance between
x and 1 has to be greater than 0, right? That's what this tells us. So I have to prove, you
give me an epsilon, that I can give you a delta. And as long as x is within
delta of 1 and this is all this is saying as long as
the distance between x and 1, right? That's when you subtract
2 things and take the absolute value. That's just distance. So as long as the distance
between x and 1 is less than delta then the distance between
3x let me write that up there the distance between 3x
times x minus 1 over x minus 1, that's the function, right? The distance between that and
the limit point and 3 is going to be less
than the epsilon. A lot of calculus text
books, you know, they'll write it generally. They're like, the limit of f of
x as x approaches a of equals l, and so this would be a. This would be your f of
x, and this would be your l, right there. But anyway, when someone says
they want you to prove this, they essentially want
you to prove this. I'll give you an epsilon. You have to prove that any
epsilon that you're given, or that you give me, that I
let's say I'm the one who has to prove it any epsilon you
give me, I have to be able to give you a delta where, as long
as x is within delta of 1, then the function is within
epsilon of the limit point. And how do we do that? And I'll just say, you know, a
lot of proofs, it's just kind of there's not a well,
there's not a systematic way to do proofs. And that's kind of what
makes them so interesting on a lot of levels. But these, there kind of tends
to be a systematic way. And this problem I've given
you, to some degree, is kind of the easy one that they'll give
when they ask you to prove these. But they usually involve
starting from this point right here and algebraically
manipulating it until you get until this expression
right here looks something like this expression. And then you'll have
this expression is less than, you know, epsilon
divided by something. Or, you know, some
function of epsilon. And it's like, oh, well as long
as delta is that, you give me an epsilon, I can just apply
that, you know, take epsilon and divide it by
4, or whatever. And use that as my delta. Then I've proved the theorem. And so we'll do that here. So let's start with this. Let's start with kind of
where we want to get to. And then figure out a delta
that's essentially a function of epsilon. So that whenever I'm given an
epsilon, I can say, hey, whatever number you give me,
I'm going to give you back a number that's, you know,
that divided by whatever. And then this will all work. So let's do that. So immediately we
can simplify this. We can cross these out. And when you cross that out,
you still have to say, well, we can't do that as long as x
you can only do this as long as you assume that x
does not equal 1. Because if x equals 1, this
function is undefined, right? And that's OK because we only
care about the intervals as x approaches 1. We only care about the
intervals as x approaches 1. We don't care exactly
when x is equal to 1. So that's fine. So then this simplifies to
this right there simplifies to the absolute value of 3x
minus 3 is less than epsilon. And then we could factor out a
3, so that's, you know, we could say the absolute value of
3 times x minus 1 is less than epsilon. And you might already see, we
already have an x minus 1 there and an x minus 1 there. If we can get this 3 over
on this side, then we'll be done, essentially. So the absolute value of 3
times some other number, it's going to be the same thing as
the absolute value of 3 times the absolute value
of x minus 1. And if you don't believe me,
I mean, try it out with a bunch of numbers. This is going to be
positive no matter what. This is going to be
positive no matter what. It's going to have the
same magnitude, right? And of course, that is
less than epsilon. And this is what we say you
know, a lot of times a calculus teacher will say, if this is
true, this is true, if and only if this is true. And that's just a
fancy way of saying. So sometimes they'll
do a two way arrow. Sometimes they'll write IF
and only IF, kind of an IFF. An IF with 2 f's. But that just means if
that's true, that's true. And if this is true,
then that's true. And that's generally the case,
whenever you just do some algebraic manipulation. You can manipulate this back to
get that, or that to get that. And then they'll say, well, if
this is true, this is true if and only if this is true. But this is just
algebraic manipulation. Right? Because you can go back and
forth between these steps. And that's true, if and
only if that is true. And then the absolute value
of 3 is just 3, right? We know that. Let's divide both sides by 3
and you get well, I can just get rid of the absolute
value signs right there. Because we know that's 3. If you divide both sides of the
equation by 3, you get the absolute value of x minus 1
is less than epsilon over 3. So what have we
just done so far? We've just proved that the
absolute value I need to write this in another color. We've just proved that the
absolute value of essentially 3x times x minus 1 over x minus
1 minus 3 is less than epsilon, if and only if x minus 1 is
less than epsilon over 3. Right? So it's like, this is true, as
long as the distance between x and 1 is less than
epsilon over 3. So we can just use epsilon
over 3 as our delta. Remember the whole point of
this was like, you give me an epsilon, you give me a
distance, or you say, I want to be within this distance
of my limit point. I want the function to be that
close to the limit point. And this is just the distance
between the function and the limit point, right? This is f of x. And this is the limit
that it approaches. So you want to be that close. And I say, well, you're going
to be that close if and only if x the distance between x and
1, or the distance between x and the value it's
approaching is less than this. So we just prove
this algebraically. So whatever number you give
me if you give me a if you say, Sal, I want to be
within 1 of the limit point. I want f of x to be no further
than 1 from the limit point, then I'll say, OK, and
I'll give you 1/3, right? Because this is true. Let me write that out. So let's say you pick
1 as an epsilon. So you say, hey, you need to
prove to me that there's some x value where, as long as the x
value is no more there's some value of delta. So as long as we're no more
than delta away from 1, then the function itself will
be no more than 1 away from the limit value. Right? And then I say, well,
you, gave me an epsilon that's equal to 1. So I could just make I can
just say this is, you know, we just proved, if and only if
absolute value of x minus 1 is less than whatever number
you gave me divided by 3. And that actually makes
a lot of sense if you graph this equation. Let me see. Let me draw the x-axis, y-axis. We already established. This thing looks just like the
equation of 3x except it has a hole at x is equal to 1. Let me draw the graph. It'll have slope. It'll have the slope of 3. So it'll be pretty steep. It'll look something like that. And when we're at 1
this point right here there's a hole. Right? This is 3. So all we're saying, we just
proved that so if you said that you wanted to be within 1
of our limit point, that's like you giving me an epsilon of 1. So this distance
right here is 1. Which would be a
pretty big number. So you want the function
to be within 1 of our limit point, right? Because this is
the limit point. Then all we're saying is, you
just have to take 1/3 of that. So we just have to be within
1/3 so this distance right here is 1/3 away from 1. Or we could have said it more
generally, this is epsilon. This is epsilon. This would be epsilon over 3. This is epsilon over 3. And the reason why this is a
proof, is because it shows no matter what epsilon you give
me, I can always find a delta. Because I can just take
whatever number you gave me, and divide it by 3. And I can divide any real
number greater than 0. I can divide any
real number by 3. So I can always no matter
what you give me I can always find you something else. And therefore, I have proven by
the epsilon delta definition of limits that the limit
as x approaches 1, of this, is equal to 3. 

Transcript for: Derivative as slope of a tangent line | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
We're first exposed to the idea
of a slope of a line early on in our algebra careers, but I
figure it never hurts to review it a bit. So let me draw some axes. That is my y-axis. Maybe I should call
it my f of x-axis. y is equal to f of x. Let me draw my x-axis, just
like that, that is my x-axis. And let me draw a line, let
me draw a line like this. And what we want to do is
remind ourselves, how do we find the slope of that line? And what we do is, we take
two points on the line, so let's say we take
this point, right here. Let's say that that is the
point x is equal to a. And then what would this be? This would be the point f of
a, where the function is going to be some line. We could write f of x is going
to be equal to mx plus b. We don't know what m and
b are, but this is all a little bit of review. So this is a. And then the y-value is what
happens to the function when you evaluated it at a, so
that's that point right there. And then we could take
another point on this line. Let's say we take
point b, right there. And then this coordinate
up here is going to be the point b, f of b. Right? Because this is just the
point when you evaluate the function at b. You put b in here, you're going
to get that point right there. So let me just draw a
little line right there. So that is f of b, right there. Actually, let me make it clear
that this coordinate right is the point a, f of a. So how do we find the slope
between these 2 points, or more generally, of this entire line? Because whole the slope
is consistent the whole way through it. And we know that once we
find the slope, that's actually going to be
the value of this m. That's all a review of your
algebra, but how do we do it? Well, a couple of ways
to think about it. Slope is equal to
rise over run. You might have seen that when
you first learned algebra. Or another way of writing
it, it's change in y over change in x. So let's figure out what the
change in why over the change in x is for this
particular case. So the change in y
is equal to what? Well, let's just take, you can
take this guy as being the first point, or that guy
as being the first point. But since this guy has a
larger x and a larger y, let's start with him. The change in y between that
guy and that guy is this distance, right here. So let me draw a
little triangle. That distance right
there is a change in y. Or I could just transfer
it to the y-axis. This is the change in y. That is your change
in y, that distance. So what is that distance? It's f of b minus f of a. So it equals f of
b minus f of a. That is your change in y. Now what is your change
in x The slope is change in y over change in x. So what our change in x? What's this distance? Remember, we're taking this
to be the first point, so we took its y minus
the other point's y. So to be consistent, we're
going to have to take this point x minus this point x. So this point's
x-coordinate is b. So it's going to be b minus a. And just like that, if you knew
the equation of this line, or if you had the coordinates of
these 2 points, you would just plug them in right here and
you would get your slope. That straightforward. And that comes straight out
of your Algebra 1 class. And let me just, just to make
sure it's concrete for you, if this was the point 2, 3, and
let's say that this, up here, was the point 5, 7, then if we
wanted to find the slope of this line, we would do 7 minus
3, that would be our change in y, this would be 7 and this
would be 3, and then we do that over 5 minus 2. Because this would be a 5, and
this would be a 2, and so this would be your change in x. 5 minus 2. So 7 minus 3 is 4, and 5
minus 2 is 3. so your slope would be 4/3. Now let's see if we
can generalize this. And this is what the new
concept that we're going to be learning as we
delve into calculus. Let's see if we can generalize
this somehow to a curve. So let's say I have a curve. We have to have a curve
before we can generalize it to a curve. Let me scroll down a little. Well, actually, I want to
leave this up here, show you the similarity. Let's say I have, I'll keep
it pretty general right now. Let's say I have a curve. I'll make it a
familiar-looking curve. Let's say it's the curve y is
equal to x squared, which looks something like that. And I want to find the slope. Let's say I want to find
the slope at some point. And actually, before even
talking about it, let's even think about what it means to
find the slope of a curve. Here, the slope was the same
the whole time, right? But on a curve your
slope is changing. And just to get an intuition
for that means, is, what's the slope over here? Your slope over here is the
slope of the tangent line. The line just
barely touches it. That's the slope over there. It's a negative slope. Then over here, your slope is
still negative, but it's a little bit less negative. It goes like that. I don't know if I did
that, drew that. Let me do it in a
different color. Let me do it in purple. So over here, your slope is
slightly less negative. It's a slightly less
downward-sloping line. And then when you go over here,
at the 0 point, right here, your slope is pretty much flat,
because the horizontal line, y equals 0, is tangent
to this curve. And then as you go to more
positive x's, then your slope starts increasing. I'm trying to draw
a tangent line. And here it's increasing even
more, it's increased even more. So your slope is changing the
entire time, and this is kind of the big change that happens
when you go from a line to a curve. A line, your slope is the
same the entire time. You could take any two points
of a line, take the change in y over the change in x, and you
get the slope for the entire line. But as you can see already,
it's going to be a little bit more nuanced when
we do it for a curve. Because it depends what
point we're talking about. We can't just say, what is
the slope for this curve? The slope is different at
every point along the curve. It changes. If we go up here, it's
going to be even steeper. It's going to look
something like that. So let's try a bit
of an experiment. And I know how this experiment
turns out, so it won't be too much of a risk. Let me draw better than that. So that is my y-axis,
and that's my x-axis. Let's call this, we can call
this y, or we can call this the f of x axis. Either way. And let me draw my curve again. And I'll just draw it in the
positive coordinate, like that. That's my curve. And what if I want to find
the slope right there? What can I do? Well, based on our definition
of a slope, we need 2 points to find a slope, right? Here, I don't know how to
find the slope with 1 point. So let's just call this
point right here, that's going to be x. We're going to be general. This is going to
be our point x. But to find our slope,
according to our traditional algebra 1 definition of a
slope, we need 2 points. So let's get another
point in here. Let's just take a slightly
larger version of this x. So let's say, we want to take,
actually, let's do it even further out, just because it's
going to get messy otherwise. So let's say we have
this point right here. And the difference, it's
just h bigger than x. Or actually, instead of saying
h bigger, let's just, well let me just say h bigger. So this is x plus h. That's what that point
is right there. So what going to be their
corresponding y-coordinates on the curve? Well, this is the curve
of y is equal to f of x. So this point right here
is going to be f of our particular x right here. And maybe to show you that I'm
taking a particular x, maybe I'll do a little 0 here. This is x naught, this
is x naught plus h. This is f of x naught. And then what is this going
to be up here, this point up here, that point up here? Its y-coordinate is going to be
f of f of this x-coordinate, which I shifted
over a little bit. It's right there. f of this
x-coordinate, which is f of x naught plus h. That's its y-coordinate. So what is a slope going to be
between these two points that are relatively close
to each other? Remember, this isn't
going to be the slope just at this point. This is the slope of the line
between these two points. And if I were to actually draw
it out, it would actually be a secant line between,
to the curve. So it would intersect the curve
twice, once at this point, once at this point. You can't see it. If I blew it up a little
bit, it would look something like this. This is our coordinate x naught
f of x naught, and up here is our coordinate for this
point, which would be, the x-coordinate would be x naught
plus h, and the y-coordinate would be f of x naught plus h. Just whatever this function is,
we're evaluating it at this x-coordinate That's all it is. So these are the 2 points. So maybe a good start is to
just say, hey, what is the slope of this secant line? And just like we did in the
previous example, you find the change in y, and you divide
that by your change in x. Let me draw it here. Your change in y would be that
right here, change in y, and then your change in x would
be that right there. So what is the slope going
to be of the secant line? The slope is going to be equal
to, let's start with this point up here, just because
it seems to be larger. So we want a change in y. so
this value right here, this y-value, is f of
x naught plus h. I just evaluated
this guy up here. Looks like a fancy term,
but all it means is, look. The slightly larger x
evaluate its y-coordinate. Where the curve is
at that value of x. So that is going to be, so the
change in y is going to be a f of x naught plus h. That's just the
y-coordinate up here. Minus this y-coordinate
over here. So minus f of x naught. So that equals our change in y. And you want to divide
that by your change in x. So what is this? This is the larger x-value. We started with this
coordinate, so we start with its x-coordinate. So it's x naught plus
h, x naught plus h. Minus this x-coordinate. Well, we just picked
a general number. It's x naught. So that is over
your change in x. Just like that. So this is the slope
of the secant line. We still haven't answered what
the slope is right at that point, but maybe this
will help us get there. If we simplify this, so let
me write it down like this. The slope of the secant, let
me write that properly. The slope of the secant line is
equal to the value of the function at this point, f of x
naught plus h, minus the value of the function here,
mine f of x naught. So that just tells
us the change in y. It's the exact same definition
of slope we've always used. Over the change in x. And we can simplify this. We have x naught plus
h minus x naught. So x naught minus x naught
cancel out, so you have that over h. So this is equal to our change
in y over change in x. Fair enough. But I started off saying, I
want to find the slope of the line at that point, at
this point, right here. This is the zoomed-out
version of it. So what can I do? Well, I defined second point
here as just the first point plus some h. And we have something in our
toolkit called a limit. This h is just a
general number. It could be 10, it could be 2,
it could be 0.02, it could be 1 times 10 to the negative 100. It could be an arbitrarily
small number. So what happens, what would
happen, at least theoretically, if I were take the limit
as h approaches 0? So, you know, first, maybe h is
this fairly large number over here, and then if I take h a
little bit smaller, then I'd be finding the slope of
this secant line. If I took h to be even a little
bit smaller, I'd be finding the slope of that secant line. If h is a little bit
smaller, I'd be finding the slope of that line. So as h approaches 0, I'll be
getting closer and closer to finding the slope of the line
right at my point in question. Obviously, if h is a large
number, my secant line is going to be way off from the slope at
exactly that point right there. But if h is 0.0000001, if it's
an infinitesimally small number, then I'm going
to get pretty close. So what happens if I
take the limit as h approaches zero of this? So the limit as h approaches
0 of my secant slope. Of, let me switch to green. f of x naught plus h minus f of
x naught, that was my change in y, over h, which is
my change in x. And now just to clarify
something, and sometimes you'll see it in different calculus
books, sometimes instead of an h, they'll write
a delta x here. Where this second point would
have been defined as x naught plus delta x, and then, this
would have simplified to just delta x over there, and we'd
be taking the limit as delta x approaches 0. The exact same thing. h, delta x, doesn't matter. We're taking h as the
difference between one x point and then the higher x point,
and then we're just going to take the limit as that
approaches zero. We could have called that
delta x just as easily. But I'm going to call this
thing, which equals the slope of the tangent line, and it
does equal the slope of the tangent line, I'm going to call
this the derivative of f. Let me write that down. And I'm going to say that this
is equal to f prime of x. And this is going to
be another function. Because remember, the slope
changes at every x-value. No matter what x-value
you pick, the slope is going to be different. Doesn't have to be, but the
way I drew this curve, it is different. It can be different. So now, you give me an x-value
in here, I'll apply this formula over here, and
then I can tell you the slope at that point. And it all seems very
confusing and maybe abstract at this point. In the next video, I'll
actually do an example of calculating a slope, and
it'll make it everything a little bit more concrete. 

Transcript for: Calculating slope of tangent line using derivative definition | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video we tried to
figure out the slope of a point or the slope of a
curve at a certain point. And the way we did, we said OK,
well let's find the slope between that point and then
another point that's not too far away from that point. And we got the slope
of the secant line. And it looks all fancy, but
this is just the y value of the point that's not too far away,
and this is just the y value point of the point in
question, so this is just your change in y. And then you divide that
by your change in x. So in the example we did,
h was the difference between our 2 x values. This distance was h. And that gave us the
slope of that line. We said hey, what if we take
the limit as this point right here gets closer
and closer to this point. If this point essentially
almost becomes this point, then our slope is going to be the
slope of our tangent line. And we define that as the
derivative of our function. We said that's equal
to f prime of x. So let's if we can apply this
in this video to maybe make things a little bit more
concrete in your head. So let me do one. First I'll do a particular
case where I want to find the slope at exactly some point. So let me draw my axes again. Let's draw some
axes right there. Let's say I have the curve
this is the curve y is equal to x squared. So this is my y-axis, this is
my x-axis, and I want to know the slope at the point
x is equal to 3. When I say the slope you can
imagine a tangent line here. You can imagine a tangent line
that goes just like that, and it would just barely graze
the curve at that point. But what is the slope
of that tangent line? What is the slope of that
tangent line which is the same as the slope of the curve
right at that point. So to do it, I'm actually going
to do this exact technique that we did before, then we'll
generalize it so you don't have to do it every time for
a particular number. So let's take some
other point here. Let's call this 3 plus delta x. I'm changing the notation
because in some books you'll see an h, some books you'll see
a delta x, doesn't hurt to be exposed to both of them. So this is 3 plus delta x. So first of all what is
this point right here? This is a curve y is equal to
x squared, so f of x is 3 squared this is the point 9. This is the point
3,9 right here. And what is this
point right here? So if we were go all the way
up here, what is that point? Well here our x is
3 plus delta x. It's the same thing as
this one right here, as x naught plus h. I could have called this
3 plus h just as easily. So it's 3 plus
delta x up there. So what's the y
value going to be? Well whatever x value is, it's
on the curve, it's going to be that squared. So it's going to be the point
3 plus delta x squared. So let's figure out the
slope of this secant line. And let me zoom in a little
bit, because that might help. So if I zoom in on just
this part of the curve, it might look like that. And then I have one point
here, and then I have the other point is up here. That's the secant line. Just like that. This was the point over
here, the point 3,9. And then this point up here is
the point 3 plus delta x, so just some larger number than
3, and then it's going to be that number squared. So it's going to be 3
plus delta x squared. What is that? That's going to be 9. I'm just foiling this out,
or you do the distribute property twice. a plus b squared is a squared
plus 2 a b plus b squared, so it's going to be 9 plus two
times the product of these things. So plus 6 delta x, and then
plus delta x squared. That's the coordinate
of the second line. This looks complicated, but I
just took this x value and I squared it, because it's on the
line y is equal to x squared. So the slope of the secant line is going to be the
change in y divided by the change in x. So the change in y is just
going to be this guy's y value, which is 9 plus 6 delta
x plus delta x squared. That's this guy's y value,
minus this guy's y value. So minus 9. That's your change in y. And you want to divide
that by your change in x. Well what is your change in x? This is actually going to
be pretty convenient. This larger x value we
started with this point on the top, so we have to start with
this point on the bottom. So it's going to be
3 plus delta x. And then what's this x value? What is minus 3? That's his x value. So what does this simplify to? The numerator this 9
and that 9 cancel out, we get a 9 minus 9. And in the denominator
what happens? This 3 and minus 3 cancel out. So the change in x actually end
up becoming this delta x, which makes sense, because this delta
x is essentially how much more this guy is then that guy. So that should be the
change in x, delta x. So the slope of my secant line has simplified to 6 times
my change in x, plus my change in x squared, all of that
over my change in x. And now we can simplify
this even more. Let's divide the numerator
and the denominator by our change in x. And I'll switch colors just
to ease the monotony. So my slope of my
tangent of my secant line the one that goes
through both of these is going to be equal if you
divide the numerator and denominator this becomes 6. I'm just dividing numerator
and denominator by delta x plus six plus delta x. So that is the slope
of this secant line So slope is equal
to 6 plus delta x. That's this one right here. That's this reddish line that
I've drawn right there. So this number right here, if
the delta x was one, if these were the points 3 and 4,
then my slope would be 6 plus 1, because I'm picking a point
4 where the delta x here would have to be 1. So the slope would be 7. So we have a general formula
for no matter what my delta x is, I can find the slope
between 3 and 3 plus delta x. Between those two points. Now we wanted to find the
slope at exactly that point right there. So let's see what happens
when delta x get smaller and smaller. This is what delta
x is right now. It's this distance. But if delta x got a little
bit smaller, then the secant line would look like that. Got even smaller, the secant line would look like that,
it gets even smaller. Then we're getting pretty
close to the slope of the tangent line. The tangent line is this
thing right here that I want to find the slope of. Let's find a limit as our
delta x approaches 0. So the limit as delta
x approaches 0 of our slope of the secant line of 6 plus delta
x is equal to what? This is pretty straightforward. You can just set this equal
to 0 and it's equal to 6. So the slope of our tangent
line at the point x is equal to 3 right there is equal to 6. And another way we could write
this if we wrote that f of x is equal to x squared. We now know that the derivative
or the slope of the tangent line of this function at the
point 3 I just only evaluated it at the point 3 right there
that that is equal to 6. I haven't yet come up with a
general formula for the slope of this line at any point, and
I'm going to do that in the next video. 

Transcript for: The derivative of f(x)=x^2 for any x | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we found the
slope at a particular point of the curve y is equal
to x squared. But let's see if we can
generalize this and come up with a formula that finds us
the slope at any point of the curve y is equal to x squared. So let me redraw
my function here. It never hurts to
have a nice drawing. So that is my y-axis. That is my x-axis right there. My x-axis. Let me draw my curve. It looks something like that. You've seen that
multiple times. This is y is equal
to x squared. So let's be very
general right now. Remember, if we want to find
let me just write the definition of our derivative. So if we have some point right
here let's call that x. So we want to be very general. We want to find the
slope at the point x. We want to find a function
where you give me an x and I'll tell you the
slope at that point. We're going to call
that f prime of x. That's going to be the
derivative of f of x. But all it does is, look, f of
x, you give it's a function that you give it an x, and it
tells you the value of that. And we draw the curve here. With f of x, you give that same
x but it's not going to tell you the value of the curve. It's not going to say,
oh, this is your f of x. It's going to give you the
value of the slope of the curve at that point. So f of x, if you put it into
that function, it should tell you, oh, the slope at that
point, is equal to you know, if you put 3 there, you'll say,
oh, the slope there is equal to 6. We saw that in the
last example. So that's what we want to do. And we saw on the last I
think it was 2 videos ago, that we defined f prime of x
to be equal to just the well, I'll write it this way. It's the slope of the secant
line between x and some point that's a little
bit further away from x. So the slope of the secant
line is change in y. So it's the y value of the
point that's a little bit further away from x. So f of x plus h minus
the y value at x, right? Because this is right here. This is f of x. So minus f of x. All of that over
the change in x. So if this is x plus h
here, the change in x is x plus h minus x. Or this distance right
here is just h. The change in x is going
to be equal to h. So that's just slope of
the secant line, between any 2 points like that. And we said, hey, we could find
the slope of the tangent line if we just take the limit of
this as it approaches as h approaches 0. And then we'll be finding the
slope of the tangent line. Now let's apply this idea to
a particular function, f of x is equal to x squared. Or y is equal to x squared. So here, we could have the
point we could consider this to be the point x x squared. So f of x is just
equal to x squared. And then this would be the
point let me do it in a more vibrant color. This is the point x plus h
that's this point right here. It's a little bit further down. And then x plus h squared. And you know, in the
last video, we did this for a particular x. We did it for 3. But now I want a
general formula. You give me any x and I won't
have to do what I did in the last video for any
particular number. I'll have a general function. You give me 7, I'll tell you
what the slope is at 7. You give me negative 3, I'll
tell you what the slope is at negative 3. You give me 100,000,
I'll tell you what the slope is at 100,000. So let's apply it here. So we want to find the change
in y over the change in x. So first of all, the change
in y is this guy's y value, which is x plus h squared. That's this guy's y
value right here. That's this right here. That's x plus h squared. I just took x plus h,
evaluated, I squared it, and that's its point on the curve. So it's x plus h squared. So that's there right there. And then what's this value? f of x right here is equal to
I know it's getting messy is equal to x squared. If you take your x, you
evaluate the function at that point, you're
going to get x squared. So it's equal to
minus x squared. This is your change in y. That's this distance
right there. And just to relate it to our
definition of a derivative, this blue thing right here is
equivalent to this thing right here. We just evaluated our function. Our function is f of x
is equal to x squared. We just evaluated when x
is equal to x plus h. So if you have to square
it, if I put an a there, it'd be a squared. If I put an apple there,
it'd be apple squared. If I put an x plus h in
there, it's going to be x plus h squared. So this is that thing. And then, this thing right here
is just the function evaluated at the point in question. Right there. So this is our change in y. And let's divide that
by our change in x. Our change in x if this is x
plus h and this is just x, our change in x is just
going to be h. So that's where we
get that term from. So this is just a slope
between these 2 points. This is just a slope
between those two points. But, of course, we want to
find the limit at this point gets closer and closer to this
point, and this point gets closer and closer
to that point. So this becomes a tangent line. So we're going to take the
limit as h approaches 0, and this is our f prime of x. And this is the exact same
definition of this, instead of being general and saying,
for any function, we know what the function was. It was f of x is
equal to x squared. So we actually applied it. Instead of f of x,
we wrote x squared. Instead of f of x plus h,
we wrote x plus h squared. So let's see if we can
evaluate this limit. So this is going to be equal
to the limit as h approaches 0 to square this out. I'll do it in the same color. That's x squared plus 2xh plus
h squared, and then we have this minus x squared over here. I just multiplied this
guy out over here. And then all of that
is divided by h. Now let's see if we can
simplify this a little bit. Well, you immediately see you
have an x squared and you have a minus x squared,
so those cancel out. And then we can divide
the numerator and the denominator by h. So this simplifies to so we
get f prime of x is equal to if we divide the numerator and
the denominator by h we get 2x plus h. I'm sorry, I forgot my limit. It equals the limit. Very important. Limit as h approaches 0 of
divide everything by h, and you get 2x plus h squared
divided by h is h. And if you remember the last
video, when we did it with a particular x, we said x is
equal to 3, we got 6 plus delta x here. Or 6 plus h here, so
it's very similar. So if you take the limited h
approaches 0 here, that's just going to disappear. So this is just going
to be equal to 2x. So we just figured out that if
f of x this is a big result. This is exciting! That if f of x is equal
to x squared, f prime of x is equal to 2x. That's what we
just figured out. And I wanted to make
sure you understand how to interpret this. f of x, if you give me a value,
is going to tell you the value of the function at that point. At prime of x it's
going to tell you the slope at that point. Let me draw that. Because this is a
key realization. And you might, you know, it's
kind of maybe initially unintuitive to think of a
function that gives us the slope, at any point,
of another function. So it looks like this. Let me draw a little
neater than that. Ah, it's still not that neat. That's satisfactory. Let me just draw it in
the positive coordinate. Well, I'll just draw the
whole the curve looks something like that. Now this is the
curve of f of x. This is the curve of f of
x is equal to x squared. Just like that. So if you give me a point. You give me the point 7. You apply, you put it in
here, you square it. And it is mapped
to the number 49. So you get the number
49 right there. This is the number 7, 49. You're used to dealing with
functions right there. But what is f prime of 7? f prime of 7. You say, 2 times 7
is equal to 14. What is this 14 number here? What is this thing? Well, this is the slope
of the tangent line at x is equal to 7. So if I were to take that point
and draw a tangent line a point that just grazes our
curve if I were to just draw a tangent line. That wasn't tangent
enough for me. So that's my tangent
line right there. You get the idea. The slope of this guy you do
your change in y over your change in x is going
to be equal to 14. The slope of the curve
at y is equal to 7 is a pretty steep curve. If you wanted to find the
slope, let's say that this is y let's say it's
x is equal to 2. I said at x is equal to
7, the slope is 14. At x is equal to 2,
what is the slope? Well, you figure out f prime of
2, which is equal to 2 times 2, which is equal to 4. So the slope here is 4. You could say m is equal
to 4. m for slope. What is f prime of 0? f prime. We know that f of
0 is 0, right? 0 squared is 0. But what is f prime of 0? Well, 2 times 0 is 0. That's also equal to 0. But what does that mean? What's the interpretation? It means the slope of
the tangent line is 0. So a 0 sloped line
looks like this. Looks just like a
horizontal line. And that looks about right. A horizontal line would
be tangent to the curve at y equals 0. Let's try another one. Let's try the point minus 1. So let's say we're right
there. x is equal to minus 1. So f of minus 1, you
just square it. Because we're dealing
with x squared. So it's equal to 1. That's that point right there. What is f prime of minus 1? f prime of minus 1
is 2 times minus 1. 2 times minus is minus 2. What does that mean? It means that the slope of the
tangent line at x is equal to 1, to this curve, to the
function, is minus 2. So if I were to draw the
tangent line here the tangent line looks like that and
look, it is a downward sloping line. And it makes sense. The slope here is
equal to minus 2. 

Transcript for: Derivative intuition module | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
This right here is our
derivative intuition module. And it was a module that was
contributed by Ben Eater, and it's a pretty interesting
module, one, it's graphical and all the rest. But what's really
cool about it is it really helps to conceptualize
what a derivative is all about. And all it really
is is the slope of the tangent
line at any point. So in this exercise
right over here, they've graphed f of x is
equal to 2x to the third power, so this is 2x to the third
power right over here. And what we need to do is move
these orange dots up and down, so these orange dots
right now show a line. So when I highlight
on that orange dot, you saw this line down
here became orange. And right now that
orange dot is 0 because the slope of this
line right over here is 0. But we see that that line right
now is definitely not tangent, or the slope at that point
in our curve 2x to the third, is definitely not 0. So what we need to do
is we need to move this, so it becomes pretty close, as
close as we can kind of eyeball it, to the slope of
the tangent line. And so that looks about right
about there looks about right. That looks pretty
close to the slope of the curve at that point. And you could even see
while I do it, up here, you see DDX of f of negative 2. So the derivative at f
is equal to negative 2. So that's just saying
that when the function is equal to negative 2, what
is the derivative there? That's the slope. So by putting it
all the way up here, I'm saying that the slope is
equal to 24 at that point. So that's a pretty good
approximation just eyeballing it like that. Now, let's do this
point right over here. So it looks like the slope
is decreasing a little bit, but it's still very positive. So the slope looks maybe it's
close to around 14 or 15. And then over here,
once again, our slope has decreased bit it's
still reasonably positive. The slope looks
like it's about 5, so the slope is a decreasing. Right over here
the slope does look like it's about 0
right over here. This looks like an
inflection point actually. So our slope is 0 right there. And you see the
derivative at f is 0 is 0, which just means
this is fancy notation to say that the slope
of the tangent line, or you could say the slope of
the curve at that point, is 0. It's flat there, and you
see it really is flat. And then you go
over here, and we want to find the
derivative at f of 1. And so once again, it looks like
the slope is now increasing. So this is interesting. Up here, the slope
was very positive, but it was decreasing
as we went here. Notice, it's getting
flatter and flatter. Then it goes to 0, and now the
slope starts increasing again. So at this point, we
want to make it tangent. And so now notice
the slope has gone up relative to
when we were at 1. So that looks like the
slope right over there. And then we do the
slope over there. And if we get
pretty close, it'll actually draw the curve
of the derivative. So there you go. And so what's neat
about here, we didn't find the derivative
at every point in the curve, we found it at just add
the special points that we were able to move
these orange dots for. But since we got the
orange dots close enough to the actual derivatives,
just by eyeballing it, just trying to find the
trying to look at what the slope of this
tangent line is, it said, OK, you've done it
right, and it drew the whole slope
of the derivative. And what this entire derivative
is saying is at any point, this is the slope
of the tangent line. So even though we didn't move
a dot around at negative 0.5, if you go right up here,
that looks like it's around this is 2 and 1/2, so this
would be a little bit over 1. It looks like that would be
the slope of the tangent line right over there. Or if we went all the
way to negative 2.25, the slope of the
tangent line looks like it's approximately
30 right over there. So once you have
the curve, you now have the slope of
the tangent line, or you have the
slope of the curve, at every point that
we see over here. So this is just, I thought,
a pretty neat exercise. 

Transcript for: Calculus: Derivatives 1 | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome to the presentation
on derivatives. I think you're going to find
that this is when math starts to become a lot more fun than
it was just a few topics ago. Well let's get started
with our derivatives. I know it sounds
very complicated. Well, in general, if I have a
straight line let me see if I can draw a straight line
properly if I had a straight line that's my coordinate
axes, which aren't straight this is a straight line. But when I have a straight line
like that, and I ask you to find the slope I think you
already know how to do this it's just the change in y
divided by the change in x. If I wanted to find the slope
really I mean the slope is the same, because it is a straight
line, the slope is the same across the whole line, but if I
want to find the slope at any point in this line, what I
would do is I would pick a point x say I'd
pick this point. We'd pick a different color
I'd take this point, I'd pick this point it's pretty
arbitrary, I could pick any two points, and I would figure out
what the change in y is this is the change in y, delta y,
that's just another way of saying change in y and
this is the change in x. delta x. And we figured out that the
slope is defined really as change in y divided
by change in x. And another way of saying that
is delta it's that triangle delta y divided by delta x. Very straightforward. Now what happens, though,
if we're not dealing with a straight line? Let me see if I have
space to draw that. Another coordinate axes. Still pretty messy, but I
think you'll get the point. Now let's say, instead of just
a regular line like this, this follows the standard
y equals mx plus b. Let's just say I had the
curve y equals x squared. Let me draw it in a
different color. So y equals x squared looks
something like this. It's a curve, you're probably
pretty familiar with it by now. And what I'm going to
ask you is, what is the slope of this curve? And think about that. What does it mean to take
the slope of a curve now? Well, in this line, the slope
was the same throughout the whole line. But if you look at this
curve, doesn't the slope change, right? Here it's almost flat, and it
gets steeper steeper steeper steeper steeper until
gets pretty steep. And if you go really far out,
it gets extremely steep. So you're probably saying,
well, how do you figure out the slope of a curve whose
slope keeps changing? Well there is no slope
for the entire curve. For a line, there is a slope
for the entire line, because the slope never changes. But what we could try to
do is figure out what the slope is at a given point. And the slope at a given point
would be the same as the slope of a tangent line. For example let me pick a
green the slope at this point right here would be the same
as the slope of this line. Right? Because this line
is tangent to it. So it just touches that curve,
and at that exact point, they would have this blue curve, y
equals x squared, would have the same slope as
this green line. But if we go to a point back
here, even though this is a really badly drawn graph,
the slope would be something like this. The tangent slope. The slope would be a negative
slope, and here it's a positive slope, but if we took a
point here, the slope would be even more positive. So how are we going
to figure this out? How are we going to figure out
what the slope is at any point along the curve y
equals x squared? That's where the derivative
comes into use, and now for the first time you'll actually see
why a limit is actually a useful concept. So let me try to
redraw the curve. OK, I'll draw my axes, that's
the y-axis I'll just do it in the first quadrant and this
is I really have to find a better tool to do my this is
x coordinate, and then let me draw my curve in yellow. So y equals x squared looks
something like this. I'm really concentrating
to draw this at least decently good. OK. So let's say we want to find
the slope at this point. Let's call this point a. At this point, x equals a. And of course this is f of a. So what we could try to do
is, we could try to find the slope of a secant line. A line between we take
another point, say, somewhat close, to this point on the
graph, let's say here, and if we could figure out the slope
of this line, it would be a bit of an approximation of
the slope of the curve exactly at this point. So let me draw
that secant line. Something like that. Secant line looks
something like that. And let's say that this point
right here is a plus h, where this distance is just h, this
is a plus h, we're just going h away from a, and then
this point right here is f of a plus h. My pen is malfunctioning. So this would be an
approximation for what the slope is at this point. And the closer that h gets,
the closer this point gets to this point, the better our
approximation is going to be, all the way to the point that
if we could actually get the slope where h equals 0, that
would actually be the slope, the instantaneous slope, at
that point in the curve. But how can we figure out what
the slope is when h equals 0? So right now, we're saying that
the slope between these two points, it would be the
change in y, so what's the change in y? It's this, so that this point
right here is the x coordinate is my thing just
keeps messing up the x coordinate is a plus h, and the
y coordinate is f of a plus h. And this point right here, the
coordinate is a and f of a. So if we just use the standard
slope formula, like before, we would say change in
y over change in x. Well, what's the change in y? It's f of a plus h this
y coordinate minus this y coordinate minus f of
a over the change in x. Well that change in x is this
x coordinate, a plus h, minus this x coordinate, minus a. And of course this a
and this a cancel out. So it's f of a plus h,
minus f of a, all over h. This is just the slope
of this secant line. And if we want to get the slope
of the tangent line, we would just have to find what happens
as h gets smaller and smaller and smaller. And I think you know
where I'm going. Really, we just want to, if we
want to find the slope of this tangent line, we just have
to find the limit of this value as h approaches 0. And then, as h approaches 0,
this secant line is going to get closer and closer to the
slope of the tangent line. And then we'll know the exact
slope at the instantaneous point along the curve. And actually, it turns out
that this is the definition of the derivative. And the derivative is nothing
more than the slope of a curve at an exact point. And this is super useful,
because for the first time, everything we've talked
about to this point is the slope of a line. But now we can take any
continuous curve, or most continuous curves, and find
the slope of that curve at an exact point. So now that I've given you the
definition of what a derivative is, and maybe hopefully a
little bit of intuition, in the next presentation I'm going to
use this definition to actually apply it to some functions,
like x squared and others, and give you some more problems. I'll see you in the
next presentation 

Transcript for: Calculus: Derivatives 2 | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last presentation, I
hopefully gave you a little bit of an intuition of
what a derivative is. It's really just a way to
find the slope at a given point along the curve. Now we'll actually apply
it to some functions. So let's say I had
the function f of x. f of x is equal to x squared. And I want to know what is
the slope of this curve. What is the slope at x is equal
to let's say at x equals 3. What is the slope of x? Let's draw out what I'm asking. Coordinate axis. x-coordinate, that's
the y-coordinate. And then if I were to draw
let me pick a different color. So we want to say what is the
slope when x is equal to 3. This is x equals 3. And of course when x equals
3, f of x is equal to 9. We know that, right? So what we do is we take a
point, maybe a little bit further along the curve. Let's say this point
right here is 3 plus h. And I keep it abstract as h
because as you know we're going to take the limit
as h approaches 0. And at this point
right here is what? It's 3 plus h squared, right? Because the function is f of
x is equal to x squared. So this point right here is
3 plus h, 3 plus h squared. Because we just take the 3 plus
h and put it into x squared and we get 3 plus h squared. And this point here
is of course 3, 9. What we want to do is we
want to find the slope between these two point. I really have to
find a better tool. This one keeps freezing, I
think it's too CPU intensive. But anyway. So we want to find the slope
between these two points. So what's the slope? so it's a
change in y, so it's 3 plus h squared minus this y minus
9 over the change in x. Well that's 3 plus h minus 3. So if we simplify this top
part or we multiply it out, what's 3 plus h squared? That's 9 plus 6h plus h
squared, and then get the minus 9, and all of that is over
well this 3 and this minus 3 cancel out, so all
you're left is with h. And even if we simplify
this, this 9 minus 9, they cancel out. So let me go up here. We're left with this pen
keeps freezing it's 6h plus h squared over h. And now we would simplify this,
right, because we can divide the top and the bottom, that
numerator and the denominator by h. And you get 6 plus h squared. So that's the slope
between these two points. It's 6 plus h squared. So if we want to find the
instantaneous slope at the point x equals 3, f of x is
equal to 9, or the point 3,9, we just have to find the limit
as h approaches 0 here. So we'll just take the
limit as h approaches 0. Well this is an easy
limit problem, right? What's the limit of 6 plus h
squared as h approaches 0? Well it equals 6. So we now know that the
slope of this curve at the point x equals 3 is 6. So if you actually did a
traditional rise over run, the slope, this change in
y over change in x is 6. So we have the instantaneous
slope at exactly the point x is equal to 3. So that's useful. You know if this was a graph of
someone's position, we would then know kind of the
instantaneous velocity, which is well I won't go into that. I'll do a separate
module on physics. But this was useful, but
let's see if we can do more generalized version where we
don't have to know ahead of time what point we want
to find the slope at. If we can get a generalized
formula for the slope at any point along the graph f of
x is equal to x squared. So let me clear this. So we're going to stick with f
of x is equal to x squared. And we know that the slope at
any point of this is just going to be the limit as h approaches
0 of f of x plus h minus f of access. All of that over h. This part right here, this is
just the slope formula that you learned years ago. It's just change in
y over change in x. And all we're doing is we're
seeing what happens as the change in x gets smaller and
smaller and smaller as it actually approaches 0. And that's why we can get
the instantaneous change at that point in the curve. So let's apply this
definition of a derivative to this function. And actually if you want to
know the notation, I think this is the notation
Lagrange came up with. This is equal to f prime of x. Don't take my word
on it on Lagrange. You might want to look
it up on Wikipedia. But this [UNINTELLIGIBLE] derivative of f of
x is f prime of x. Let's apply it to x squared. So we're going to say the
limit as h approaches 0 of f of x plus h. Well, f of x plus h is
just this pen driving me crazy x plus h squared. I just took the x plus h
and put it into f of x. Minus f of xwell that's
just x squared over h. And this is equal to the
limit as h approaches 0. Just multiply this out of. x squared plus 2xh plus h
squared minus x squared running out of space
all of that over h. Let's simplify this. This x squared cancels out
with this minus x squared. And then we can divide the
numerator and the denominator by h, and we're left with the
limit as h approaches 0. Numerator and denominator
by h of 2x plus h. Well this is easy. This goes to 0, this
is just equal to 2x. So there we have it. The limit as h approaches
0 is equal to 2x. And this is equal to f prime of
x, so the derivative of f of x, which is the denoted by f
prime of x is equal to 2x. Well what does it tell us? What have we done
for ourselves? Well now I can give you any
point along the curve. Let's say we want to know the
slope at the point 16, right. When at the point 16,256. That's a point along f
of x equals x squared. It's just 16 and
then 16 squared. What's the slope at that point? Well we now know the
slope is 2 times 16. So the slope is equal to 32. Whatever the x value is you
just put into this f prime of x function or the derivative
function, and you'll get the slope at that point. I think that's pretty neat and
I'll show you how in future presentations how we can
apply this to physics and optimization problems and a
whole other set of things. And I'm also going to show you
how to find the derivatives for a whole set of other functions. I'll see in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Power rule introduction (old) | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. In the last presentation I
showed you that if I had the function f of x is equal to x
squared, that the derivative of this function, which is denoted
by f look at that, my pen is already malfunctioning. The derivative of that
function, f prime of x, is equal to 2x. And I used the limit
definition of a derivative. I used, let me write
it down here. This pen is horrible. I need to really figure out
some other tool to use. The limit as h approaches 0 
sometimes you'll see delta x instead of h, but it's the same
thing of f of x plus h minus f of x over h. And I used this definition of a
derivative, which is really just the slope at any given
point along the curve, to figure this out. That if f of x is equal
to x squared, that the derivative is 2x. And you could actually
use this to do others. And I won't do it now,
maybe I'll do it in a future presentation. But it turns out that if you
have f of x is equal to x to the third, that the derivative
is f prime of x is equal to 3x squared. If f of x is equal to x to
the fourth, well then the derivative is equal
to 4x to the third. I think you're starting
to see a pattern here. If I actually wrote up here
that if f of x  let me see if I have space to
write it neatly. If I wrote f of x  I hope
you can see this  f of x is equal to x. Well you know this. I mean, y equals x, what's
the slope of y equals x? That's just 1, right? y equals x, that's
a slope of 1. You didn't need to know
calculus to know that. f prime of x is
just equal to 1. And then you can probably
guess what the next one is. If f of x is equal to x to the
fifth, then the derivative is I think you could guess
5 x to the fourth. So in general, for any
expression within a polynomial, or any degree x to whatever
power let's say f of x is equal to this pen
drives me nuts. f of x is equal to
x to the n, right? Where n could be any exponent. Then f prime of x is equal
to nx to the n minus 1. And you see this is what
the case was in all these situations. That 1 didn't show up. n minus 1. So if n was 25, x to the
25th power, the derivative would be 25 x to the 24th. So I'm going to use this rule
and then I'm going to show you a couple of other ones. And then now we can figure out
the derivative of pretty much any polynomial function. So just another
couple of rules. This might be a little
intuitive for you, and if you use that limit definition of a
derivative, you could actually prove it. But if I want to figure out the
derivative of, let's say, the derivative of So another way
of this is kind of, what is the change with respect to x? This is another notation. I think this is what Leibniz
uses to figure out the derivative operator. So if I wanted to find the
derivative of A f of x, where A is just some constant number. It could be 5 times f of x. This is the same thing
as saying A times the derivative of f of x. And what does that tell us? Well, this tells us that,
let's say I had f of x. f of x is equal to and this
only works with the constants f of x is equal to 5x squared. Right? Well this is the same thing
as 5 times x squared. I know I'm stating the obvious. So we can just say that the
derivative of this is just 5 times the derivative
of x squared. So f prime of x is equal to
5 times, and what's the derivative of x squared? Right, it's 2x. So it equals 10x. Right? Similarly, let's say I
had g of x, just using a different letter. g of x is equal to and my
pen keeps malfunctioning. g of x is equal to, let's
say, 3x to the 12th. Then g prime of x, or the
derivative of g, is equal to 3 times the derivative
of x to the 12th. Well we know what that is. It's 12 x to the 11th. Which you would have seen. 12x to the 11th. This equals 36x to the 11th. Pretty straightforward, right? You just multiply the
constant times whatever the derivative would have been. I think you get that. Now one other thing. If I wanted to apply the
derivative operator let me change colors just to mix
things up a little bit. Let's say if I wanted to apply
the derivative of operator I think this is called
the addition rule. It might be a little
bit obvious. f of x plus g of x. This is the same thing as the
derivative of f of x plus the derivative3 of g of x. That might seem a little
complicated to you, but all it's saying is that you can
find the derivative of each of the parts when you're adding
up, and then that's the derivative of the whole thing. I'll do a couple of examples. So what does this tell us? This is also the same
thing, of course. This is, I believe,
Leibniz's notation. And then Lagrange's notation
is of course these were the founding fathers of calculus. That's the same thing as f
prime of x plus g prime of x. And let me apply this, because
whenever you apply it, I think it starts to seem a
lot more obvious. So let's say f of x is equal
to 3x squared plus 5x plus 3. Well, if we just want to figure
out the derivative, we say f prime of x, we just find the
derivative of each of these terms. Well, this is 3 times the
derivative of x squared. The derivative of x squared,
we already figured out, is 2x, right? So this becomes 6x. Really you just take the 2,
multiply it by the 3, and then decrement the 2 by 1. So it's really 6x to the first,
which is the same thing as 6x. Plus the derivative of 5x is 5. And you know that because if I
just had a line that's y equals 5x, the slope is 5, right? Plus, what's the derivative
of a constant function? What's the derivative of 3? Well, I'll give you a hint. Graph y equals 3 and tell
me what the slope is. Right, the derivative
of a constant is 0. I'll show other times why that
might be more intuitive. Plus 0. You can just ignore that. f prime of x is
equal to 6x plus 5. Let's do some more. I think the more examples
we do, the better. And I want to keep switching
notations, so you don't get daunted whenever you see
it in a different way. Let's say y equals 10x to
the fifth minus 7x to the third plus 4x plus 1. So here we're going to apply
the derivative operator. So we say dy this
is I think Leibniz's notation dy over dx. And that's just the change
in y over the change in x, over very small changes. That's kind of how I view this
d, like a very small delta. Is equal to 5 times 10 is 50
x to the fourth minus 21  right, 3 times 7
x squared plus 4. And then the 1, the
derivative of 1 is just 0. So there it is. We figured out the
derivative of this very complicated function. And it was pretty
straightforward. I think you'll find that
derivatives of polynomials are actually more straightforward
than a lot of concepts that you learned a lot earlier
in mathematics. That's all the time I have
now for this presentation. In the next couple I'll just do
a bunch of more examples, and I'll show you some more rules
for solving even more complicated derivatives. See you in the next
presentation. 

Transcript for: The Chain Rule
Welcome back. I'm now going to do some more
examples of a bit of a review of some of the derivatives
that we've been seeing. And then I'll introduce you to
something called the chain rule which expands the universe of
the types of functions we can take the derivatives of. So in the last presentation, I
showed you how to function if I had f of x is equal to 10x to
the seventh plus 6x to the third plus 15x minus
x to the 16th. To take the derivative of this
entire function, we take just the derivatives of each
of the pieces, right? Because you can add them up. So f prime of x in this
example, is equal to and I think you get the hang
of it at this point. It's actually fairly
straightforward. We take the 7, multiply
it by the 10. So we get 70x, then
1 degree less. So 70x to the sixth plus
18x squared plus 15. We can kind of view this
as x to the 1, right? So it's 1 times 15
times x to the 0. Which is 1. So that's just 15 minus
16x to the 15th. And I don't want you to
lose sight of what we're actually doing here. What is f prime of x? This is the function the tells
us the slope of any point x, along the curve f of x. It's a pretty
interesting thing. Let me just draw to maybe give
you a little bit of intuition. I don't know what the slope
of f of x really looks like. And actually, let's pretend
like this isn't f of x. Let's pretend like this
is just some arbitrary function I'm drawing. If this is f of x, just some
curve that does all sorts of crazy things, f prime of x
tells me the slope at any point along that line. So if I wanted to know the
slope at this point right here, I could use the derivative
function to figure out the slope of the tangent line. The tangent line is something
like that right there. Or if I wanted to figure out
the slope at this point, once again I'd use the
derivative function. And it would tell me the
slope of the tangent line at that point. Which would be
something like that. So it's a pretty useful thing. And once I give you all the
tools to analytically solve a whole host of derivatives, then
we'll actually do a bunch of word problems and
applications of derivatives. And I think you'll see that
it's a really, really, really useful concept. So let's move on. I think you get the idea of
how to do these derivatives of polynomials. Let me erase this. I'm actually using a
different tool now. So I think it might
be a bit easier. Let's see, someone
was calling me. But you're more important so
I will not answer the phone. I'm going to introduce you
this tool doesn't have, I don't think it has a
straight up eraser. Actually, maybe let's see. If I do it like this. Oh let me see. No that doesn't work. Let me just erase like this,
the old-fashioned way. You just have to bear with me. And then once I finish erasing,
I will show you the chain rule. This is good. It feels like I'm a real
teacher with a real chalkboard and a real eraser now. This is a lot cleaner than a
normal chalkboard as well. Bear with me, almost there. I'll figure out a faster
way to do this over the next couple of videos. It's pretty sad. I'm showing you how to do
derivatives in calculus, but I don't know how to erase
a faster way than this. There, we're done. OK. So now I'm going show you how
to solve the derivatives of a slightly more complicated
type of a function. It's actually not
more complicated. It's just different. So let's say f of x is equal to
2x plus 3 to the fifth power. And I want to figure out
the derivative of this. We're going to use something
called the chain rule. Because one thing we could do,
we could just multiply out 2x plus 3 to the fifth power. And if you've ever done
that, you know it's a pain. So that's not something
we'd want to do. So we're going to use something
called the chain rule. And I'm just going to give you
a bunch of examples before I even show you the definition
of the chain rule. Because I think this is
something that you just have to learn by example. So the chain rule just tells us
that the derivative of let's say this function right here. You take the derivative of the
subfunctions, and then you can take a derivative of
the entire function. I'll tell you that formally. But I think when you introduce
it formally, it gets more confusing. So what I do, I just take the
derivative of 2x plus 3 first. And actually let me use colors. I think that might simplify it. So I take the derivative
of 2x plus 3. What's the derivative
of 2x plus 3? Well you know that. It's just the derivative
of 2x, which is 2. And then the
derivative of 3 is 0. So the derivative of
2x plus 3 is just 2. And then I'm going to multiply
that times the derivative of the whole thing. And I just pretend like
2x plus 3 is just like a variable by itself. So then what's the derivative
of x to the fifth? Well the derivative of x to the
fifth I'm going to do that in a different color the
derivative of x to the fifth is 5x to the fourth. So it'll be 5 times
something to the fourth. But here we didn't take the
derivative of x the fifth. We took the derivative of
2x plus 3 to the fifth. So we just put the 2x
plus 3 there instead. So what did we do here? We went in the inside of
the function, and we took the derivative here. And the derivative of
2x plus 3 was just 2. And then we multiplied
it by the derivative of the greater function. And we just pretended like the
2x plus 3 was a variable. It was like x. So instead of 5x to the
fourth, we got 5 times 2x plus 3 to the fourth. And if we just simplify that,
f prime of x is equal to 2 times 5 is 10; 10 times
2x plus 3 to the fourth. That was a lot simpler than
multiplying out 2x plus 3 to the fifth power, and then doing
the derivatives the old way. I know this was probably a
little confusing to you, so I'm going to try to do
a couple more examples. Let's say I had g of x is equal
to x-squared plus 2x plus 3 to the eighth power. So g prime of x is going to
equal well what did we say? We take the derivative
of the inside. This is called the chain rule. What's the derivative
of the inside? It's 2x plus 2 plus 0, right? And then we take the derivative
of the whole thing. And we just pretend like this
whole expression, x-squared plus 2x plus 3 is just kind
of like the variable x. We know that the derivative
of x to the eighth is 8x to the seventh. So it'll be 8 times
something to the seventh. And that something is this
entire expression here, 8 times x-squared plus 2x plus 3. I hope I didn't
confuse you too much. And you can simplify
this more in any way. Because it's 2x plus 2 times
8 times x-squared plus 2x plus 3 to the seventh. To multiply this out, or
to multiply this out is a huge pain as you know. But we could simplify
a little bit. Let me draw a divider here. We could say that that equals 8
times 2x, 16x plus 16 times I'm making it really messy
x-squared plus 2x plus 3 to the seventh power. I hope I didn't
confuse you too much. In the next presentation, I'm
just going to do a ton of examples using the chain rule. And I think the more examples
you see, it's going to hit the point home. And then after I've done a
bunch of examples, then I'm going to give you a
formal definition. I think that's actually an
easier way to digest the chain rule than giving you the formal
definition first, and then showing you a bunch
of examples. So I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Chain Rule Examples
I'm now going to do a
bunch more examples using the chain rule. So let's see. Once again. If I had f of x is equal to,
let's see, I don't like this tool that I'm using now,
let's have one of these. f of x is equal to, say, x to
the third plus 2x squared minus, let's say, minus
x to the negative 2. We haven't put any negative
exponents in yet, but I think you'll see that
the same patterns apply. And all of that to, let's
say, the minus seven. We want to figure out what
f prime of x, what the derivative of f of x is. So this might seem very
complicated and daunting to you, and obviously to take
this entire polynomial to the negative seventh power
would take you forever. But using the chain rule, we
can do it quite quickly. So the first thing we want to
do, is we want to take the derivative of the inner
function, I guess you could call it. We want to take the
derivative of this. And what's the derivative of x
to the third plus 2x squared minus x to the negative 2? Well, we know how to do that. That was the first type
of derivatives we learned how to do. It's 3x squared and 2 times 2,
plus 4x to the first, or just 4x, and then here, with a
negative exponent, we do the exact same thing. We say negative 2 times
negative 1, right, there's a 1 here, we don't write it down. So negative 2 times negative 1
is plus 2 x to the, and then we decrease the exponent by
1, so it's x to the negative 3, right? So we figured out what the
derivative of the inside is, and then we just multiply
that, that whole thing, times the derivative of kind of
the entire expression. So then that'll be, we
take the minus 7, let me do a different color. So this is the entire thing. So then we take minus 7, so
it's times minus 7, this whole expression, I'm
going to run out of space. x to the third plus 2x squared
minus x to the minus 2. That's minus x to the minus 2. And all of that, we just
decrease this exponent by 1, to the minus 8. So let me write it all down
a little bit neater now. So we get f prime of x as the
derivative of f of x is equal to 3x squared plus 4x plus 2x
to the minus third power, I don't know why did that. That's minus 3. Times minus seven times x to
the third plus 2x squared minus x to the minus two, all of that
to the negative eight power. And we could simplify
it little bit. Maybe we could just multiply
this minus 7, times, we could distribute it across
this expression. So we'd say, that equals minus
7, so this equals minus 21 x squared, minus 28 x minus
14x to the negative 3. All of that times x to the
third plus 2 x squared minus x to the minus 2 to the minus 8. So there we did it. We took this, what I would say
is a very complicated function, and using the chain rule and
just the basic rules we had introduced a couple of
presentations ago, we were able to find the derivative of it. And now, if we wanted to, for
whatever application, we could find the slope of this function
at any point x by just substituting that point into
this equation, and we'll get the slope at that point. Let me do a slightly harder
one, to show you that the chain rule, you can kind of go
arbitrarily deep in the chain rule. OK. So let's say I had, let
me see if I can write it a little bit thinner. If I had f of x, I don't know
if you can see that, I'm going to do it a little fatter. f of x is equal to, I want to
make it a little bit more complicated this time. 3x to the minus 2 plus 5 x to
the third minus 7x, all of that to the fifth, and then this
whole expression to the third power. So I imagine you saying, Sal,
you're starting to go nuts, this is going to
take us forever. Well, I'll show you, using
the chain rule, it will not take that long. So the way I think about
it, so f prime of x, f prime of x equals. I start off kind with
the innermost function. So let me see if I can
use colors to make it a little bit simpler. Let's take the derivative of
this innermost function first. Actually, let me give
you the big picture. We want to find the derivative
of the innermost function, and then a little bit bigger,
and then a little bit more big than that. I know that's not precise
mathematical terms, but you'll get the point when
I show you this example. So first we'll do this
inner function, this inner expression. And the derivative of
that's pretty easy, right? It's 15x squared
minus 7, right? that was pretty
straightforward. And now we're going to want
to multiply that times this entire derivative here. So let me circle that in
a different so then we want to do this. We're going to multiply that
times this entire derivative. Well, that's just times 5. And we just pretend like this
is just an x here, right? Because the derivative
of x to the fifth is 5x to the fourth, right? But instead of an x, we have
this whole expression, 5x to the third minus 7x. So we'll write that. 5x to the third minus 7x. Now the exponent here
goes down by one. So it's 5 times 5x to the
third minus 7x, all that to the fourth power. So we figured out the
derivative of this so far, and then we want to figure out the
derivative of this, so we'll add it, right, because we're
trying to figure the derivative of this entire expression. So this is an easy one. Let me draw that in
a different color. So we want the
derivative of this. So that's negative 2 times
3, so that's negative 6x to the minus three. So what have we done so far? We've so far figured out the
derivative of this entire expression, right? The derivative of that
entire expression using the chain rule is this. And now, we're almost done. We just have to multiply that. So I'm going to just, I've run
out of space on that line, but let's just assume that
the line continues. So that's times. And now we just take the
derivative of kind of this whole big thing. And now it's going to be the
derivative of, I'm going to use this brown color. So it's a whole big expression
to the third power, right? So that becomes times 3 times
the whole expression, right? That's 3 times, now I'm going
to write the whole thing, 3x to the minus 2 plus 5 x the third
minus 7x, that to fifth, and then you decrement this by
1, to the second power. That was an ultraconfusing
example, and this is probably the hardest chain rule problem
you'll see in a lot of the questions you'll
have on your test. You see, it wasn't
that difficult. We just kind of went to the
smallest possible function, and actually the smallest possible
function would have been one of these terms, but we just found
the derivative of this, which was 15 x squared minus 7, and
then we just used the principle that the derivative of kind of
a function is just the derivative of each of its
parts well, actually, the derivative of we figured out
the derivative of this inner piece, which was 15x squared
minus 7, and then we multiplied it times the derivative of this
slightly larger piece, which is 5 times this entire expression
to the fourth, then we added it to the derivative of
3x to the minus 2. And then that whole thing, and
actually I should put a big parentheses around here, that
whole thing, we multiply it times the derivative of
this larger expression. I think I might have confused
you, so I apologize if I have, and in the next presentation
I'm going to just do a bunch more chain rule problems, and
at some point, it should start to make sense to you. I think it's just a matter
of seeing example, after example, after example. I'll see you into the next
presentation, and I apologize if I have confused you. 

Transcript for: Even More Chain Rule
Now that you've seen some
examples of the chain rule in use, I think the actual
definition of the chain rule might be more digestible now. So let me give you the actual
definition of the chain rule. Let's say I have a function f
of x and it equals h of g of x. And you remember all this
from composite functions. So the chain rule just says
that the derivative of f of x or f prime of x is equal to
the derivative of this inner function, g prime of x times
the derivative of this h function, h prime of x. But it's not going to
be just h prime of x. It's going to be h
prime of g of x. So let's apply that to some
examples like we were doing before, and I think
it'll make some sense. So let's say we had f of x is
equal to x squared plus 5x plus 3, all of this
to the fifth power. So in this example, what's
h of x, what's g of x, and you know what f of x is. Well let's say g of x would
be this inner function. So we would say let me pick a
different color g of x here is x squared plus 5x plus 3. It's the stuff, f g of x. Well h of g of x is this whole
thing, so what would h of x be? This is h of g of x, but
h of x would just be x to the fifth, right? Because this expression as you
took this entire g of x and you put it in for x right here. I think that make sense if you
take this entire expression and you substitute x here for this
entire expression you get this expression. And this shows that this
is equal to h of g of x. If you just take this blue part
and substitute it for x, you get this entire expression. So the chain rule just tells us
that the derivative of this, that f prime of x and I have
a feeling I'm going to run out of space f prime of x well
actually before I do anything, let's figure out the
derivatives of g of x and h of x. g of x of g prime of x let me
draw a little line here to divide it out, I know I'm
running out of space. So g prime of x is
equal to 2x plus 5. 2x plus 5, and then derivative
3 is just 0, right? And the derivative of h of
x? h prime of x is equal to 5 x to the fourth. So the chain rule just says
that the derivative of this entire composite function
is just let me just write it down here. I'm doing this to
optimally confuse you. The derivative of this entire
function is just g prime of x. Well we figured out with g
prime of x is here, it's 2x plus 5 times h times
h prime of g of x. So what's h prime of g of x? Well h prime of x is 5x to
the fourth, but we want h prime of g of x. So h prime of g of x
would equal 5 times g of x to the fourth. And we know what g of x is,
it's this whole thing. So it would be times 5, and
this whole thing x squared plus 5x plus 3, all that
to the fourth power. I think I have truly, truly
confused you, so I'm going to try to do a couple
of more examples. Clear this. OK. Let me write it up here again. So if we say that f of x is
equal to h of g of x, then f prime of x is equal to g prime
of x times h prime of g of x. So I'll do another example. Let's say that g of x is equal
to x to the seventh minus 3x to the ninth is 3. And let's say that h of x is
equal to let's do something reasonably straightforward. Let's say h of x is
x to the minus 10. So what is f of x? f of x is
just h of g of x, and this should be a bit of a reminder
from composite functions. So let's see. h of g of x would just be you
take g of x and you substitute it for x here, so it would just
be this expression, x to the seventh minus 3x to the minus
third, and then all of that to the minus 10th power. So this is our f of x. And this is of course equal to
f of x, right, because f of x is equal to h of g of x. I know this very confusing,
but bear with me. Maybe you have to watch
the video twice and it'll start making more sense. Well we want to now figure
out what f prime of x is. Well the chain rule tells us
all it is, is we take the derivative of g of x, right? So the derivative
of g of x is what? That's easy. Or hopefully it's easy by now. Derivative of g of x is 7x to
the sixth, and minus 3 times minus 3 is plus 9x
to the minus 4. I just took minus 3 and went
down 1, so that's g prime of x. And then times h
prime of g of x. Well what's h prime of x? That's easy. That's just minus 10
times x to the minus 11. But we want to do h
prime of g of x. So instead of having an x here,
we're going to substitute that x with the entire g
of x expression. So this is just times 10 time
something to the minus eleven, and that something
is just g of x. x to the seventh, minus 3x
access to the minus 3. And there's our answer. f prime
of x is the derivative of kind of the inner function, g of x,
times the derivative of the outer function, but instead of
it just being applied to x it'd be applied to the entire g of x
instead of an x being here. Maybe I've confused you more. Let me do one quick example
just to show you that you don't have to kind of do this
whole h of g of every time. So if I have f of x is equal to
5 times minus x to the eighth, plus x to the minus eighth,
all of that over to the fifth power. If I want to figure out f prime
of x I just take the derivative of this inner function I guess
I could call it, so that's minus 8x to the seventh minus
8x because it's just take the negative 8 to the minus
ninth, times the derivative of this larger function. So 5 times 5 is 25 times
something to the fourth. And that something is just
going to be this expression minus x to the eighth plus
x to the minus eighth. And we're done. You could simplify it. You could multiply this 25 out
and do et cetera, et cetera. Hopefully this gives you more
of an intuition of what the chain rule is all about, and
I'm going to do a lot more examples in the next couple
of presentations as well. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Product rule | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. I'm now going to introduce
you to a new tool for solving derivatives. Really between this rule, which
is the product rule, and the chain rule and just knowing a
lot of function derivatives, you'll be ready to tackle
almost any derivative problem. Let's start with
the chain rule. Let's say that f of x is equal
to h of x times g of x. This is the product rule. In the chain rule it was f of
x is equal to h of g of x. Right? I don't know if you
remember that. In this case, f of x is equal
to h of x times g of x. If that's the case, then f
prime of x is equal to the derivative of the first
function times a second function plus the first
function times the derivative of the second function. Pretty straightforward. Let's apply it. Let's say that I don't like
this brown color, let me pick something more pleasant. Maybe mauve. Let's say that f of x is equal
to 5x to the fifth minus x to the seventh times 20x squared
plus 3x to them mine 7. So one way we could have
done it, we could just multiply this out. This wouldn't be too bad, and
then take the derivative like any polynomial. But let's use this product rule
that I've just shown you. So the product rules that says,
let me take the derivative of the first expression, or h of x
if we wanted to map it into this rule. The derivative of that is
pretty straightforward. 5 times 5 is 25. 25x to the fourth, right? Then minus 7, x to the sixth. We're just going to multiply it
times this second expression, doing nothing different to it. Maybe I'll just do it
in a different color. Times 20x plus 3x minus 7. And then to that we will
add the derivative of this second function. The derivative of that second
function is 40x minus 21x to the minus eighth. And that times this
first function. I guess I'll switch
back to mauve, I think you get the point. 5x to the fifth minus
x to the seventh. All we did here was we said OK,
f of x is made of these two expressions and they are
multiplied by each other. If I want to take the
derivative of it, I take the derivative of the first one and
multiply it by the second one. And then I add that to the
derivative of the second one and multiply it
by the first one. Let's do some more examples
and I think that will hit the point home. Clear image. Change the colors and
I'm back in business. Let me think of a good problem. Let me do another one like
this, and then I'll actually introduce ones and the product
rule and the chain rule. So let's say that f of x is
equal to 10x to the third plus 5x squared minus 7 times
20x to the eighth minus 7. Then we say f prime of x,
what's the derivative of this first expression. It's 30x squared plus 10x. And I just multiply it times
this expression, right? 20x to the eighth minus 7. And I add that to the
derivative of this second expression, this is all on one
line but I ran out of space, 160x to the seventh, right? 8 times 20 is 160. And then the derivative
of 7 is zero. So it's just 160x to
the seventh times this first expression. 10x to the third plus 5x
squared minus seven. There we go. And you could simplify it. You could multiply this out
if you wanted or you could distribute this out if you
wanted, maybe try to condense the terms. But that's really just algebra. So this is using
the product rule. I'm going to do one more
example where I'll show you, I'm going to use the product
and the chain rule and I think this will
optimally confuse you. I want to make sure
I have some space. Here I'm going to use a
slightly different notation. Instead of saying f of x and
then what's f prime of x, I'm going to say y is equal to x
squared plus 2x to the fifth times 3x to the minus three
plus x squared to the minus 7. And I want to find the rate at
which y changes relative to x. So I want to find dy over dx. This is just like, if this
was f of x, it's just like saying f prime of x. This is just a [UNINTELLIGIBLE] notation. So what do I do in
the chain rule? First I want the
derivative of this term. Let me use colors to make
it not too confusing. So what's the derivative
of this term? We are going to use
the chain rule first. So we take the derivative of
the inside which is 2x plus 2 and multiply times
the derivative of the larger expression. But we keep x squared plus 3x
there so it's times 5 times something to the fourth. And that something is
x squared plus 2x. So there we took the derivative
of this first term right here and then the product rules says
we take the derivative of the first term, we just multiply
it by the second term. So the second term is just 3x
to the minus 3 plus x squared and all that to the minus 7. We did that and then to that we
add plus the derivative of this second term times
this first term. We're going to use the
chain rule again. What's the derivative
of the second term? I'll switch back to
the light blue. Light blue means the derivative
of one of the terms. So we take the derivative of
the inside, the derivative of inside is minus 3 times 3 is
minus 9, x go down one to the minus 4, plus 2x. And now we take the derivative
of the whole thing. Times minus 7 times something
to the minus 8, and that something is this inside. 3x to the minus 3
plus x squared. And then we multiply this
thing, this whole thing which is the derivative of the second
term times the first term. Times, and I'm just going to
keep going, times x squared plus 2x to the fifth. So this is a really, I
mean you might want to simplify at this point. You can take this minus
7 and multiply it out and all of that. But I think this
gives you the idea. And if you have to multiply
this out and then do the derivative if it's just a
polynomial, this would take you forever. But using the chain rule,
you're actually able to, even though we ended up with a
pretty complicated answer, we got the right answer. And now we could actually
evaluate the slope of this very complicated function at any
point just by substituting the point into this fairly
complicated expression. But at least we could do it. I think you're going to find
that the chain and the product rules become even more useful
once we start doing derivatives of expressions other
than polynomials. I'm going to teach you about
trigonometric functions and natural log and logarithm
and exponential functions. Actually, I'll probably do that
in the next presentation. So I will see you soon. 

Transcript for: Quotient rule and common derivatives | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. Let's do some more
derivative problems. Let's say I want to figure out
the derivative d over dx of and let me give something that
looks a little bit different x to the third minus 5x to the
fifth, all of that to the third power over 2x plus 5
to the fifth power. This is a parentheses. This is just saying that I want
to take the derivative of this entire expression. So you're saying Sal, we've
never learn how to do this, you have something in the
numerator, you have something in the denominator I don't
know what to do next. Well let's just rewrite this. Actually in your calculus
textbooks there's something called the quotient rule, which
I think is mildly lame, because the quotient rule is just the
product rule where you have a negative exponent and they make
it another rule, and they clutter your brain. So instead of using the
quotient rule, we're just going to rewrite this bottom
expression as a product, and then we can use
the product rule. So this is the same thing as
taking the derivative of x to the third minus 5x to the
fifth, all of that to the third power, times 2x plus 5 to what? The minus fifth power. And now we can use
the product rule. Take the derivative of the
first term and the derivative of the first term isn't a
joke you take the derivative of the inside first, let's do
the chain rule, derivative of the inside first. That is 3x squared minus 25x to
the fourth times the derivative of the outside, 3 times this
entire expression x to the third minus 5x to the fifth. And then all of that, take this
exponent down one to the squared, and then multiply
it times this whole term. So 2x plus 5 to
the minus fifth. And then to that we
add the derivative of this term, so plus. So the derivative of this term
we take the derivative of the inside, which is pretty easy. It's just 2 times the
derivative of the outside, which is minus 5. And just so you know I didn't
skip a step, the derivative of 2x plus 5, the derivative of 2x
is 2, derivative of 5 is 0. So the derivative of
2x plus 5 is just 2. So it's 2 times
minus 5 2x plus 5. We just keep that the same to
the minus fifth power, and then we multiply it times this first
expression, x to the third minus 5x to the fifth
to the third power. I know that's really messy and
you'll probably not see problems this messy, but I just
wanted to show you that the product rule we learned it's
actually the product and the chain rule they can apply to
a lot of different problems, and even though you hadn't seen
something like this where you had numerator and a
denominator, you can easily rewrite what you had in
the denominator as a negative exponent. And then of course it's just
the product for when you don't have to memorize that silly
thing called the quotient rule. So with that out of the way,
I'm now going to introduce you to some common derivatives
of other functions. And these things are actually
normally included in the inside cover of your calculus book,
and they're just good to know, good things to know. And maybe in a later
presentation I'll actually prove these things. You should never take
things at face value. So you should to some degree
memorize these, although you should prove it to
yourself first. So the derivative of e to the
x and I find this to be amazing. e shows up all sorts
of crazy places in mathematics, and it's you know the strange
number 2.7 whatever, whatever and it has all sorts of
strange properties. And I think this is one of the
most bizarre properties of e. The derivative of e to the x. So if I want to figure out
the slope of any point along the curve e to the x this
just might blow your mind. I think the more you think
about it, the more it'll blow your mind is e to the x. That's amazing. At any point along the curve
e to the x, the slope of that point is e to the x. Just to hit the point home. I'm diverging, a little bit. But if I said f of x is
equal to e to the x, right? And let's say f of 2 is
equal to e squared. And I asked you, friend I
don't know your name what is the slope of e to the x
at the point 2,e squared. And you could say Sal,
the slope at that point is e squared. That blows my mind that it's a
function where the slope at any point on that line is
equal to the function. And it's e. e shows up
all sorts of places. I might do a whole series of
presentations called the magic of e, because e shows
up all over the place. Well I don't want to diverge
too much, so that's pretty amazing. Next I'm going to show you what
I think is probably the second most amazing derivative and I
don't think this has been fully explored in mathematics yet,
because this also blows my mind is that the derivative
of the natural log of x, right. So the natural log is just the
logarithm with base e, and I hope you remember
your logarithms. So what's the derivative
of the natural log of x? So once again this
is e related. Well it's 1/x. That also blows my mind. Because think about it. Let's draw a bunch
of functions. If I said the derivative
of x to the minus 3 is minus 3x to the minus 4. The derivative of x to
the minus 2 is minus 2x to the minus 3. The derivative of x to
the minus 1 is minus 1 x to the minus 2. The derivative of x to the 0
well this is just 1, right? The derivative of x to the 0 is
just 1, so the derivative is 0. The derivative of x is 1,
derivative of x squared is 2x and so on, right? So it's interesting. We have this pattern from all
the derivatives of all of the of kind of the exponents in
increasing order where you go from x to the minus 4 x to the
minus 3, x to the minus 2 and then there's no x to
the minus 1 here. We go straight to x to the 0. What happened to x the minus 1? What happened to this? What function's derivative
is x to the minus 1? This is bizarre to me. Where did it go? And it turns out that
it's a natural log. This I still think about before
I go to bed sometimes because it is kind of mind blowing. And later in another
presentation I might actually prove this to you. But just to know that this is
true, that the derivative of the natural log of x is 1/x
I think is mind blowing. And so for now you can
just memorize it. But both of these
are mind blowing. The derivative of e to the x is
e to the x, and the derivative of the natural log of x is 1/x. And I'll just do a couple of
more just to present them to you, and then in the next
presentation we'll actually use them using the product rule and
the chain rule and et cetera, et cetera. And you might want to rewatch
this and memorize them. I want to clear image. OK. And now I'll just do the basic
trig functions, and you should memorize these as well. The derivative of sin of x
this is pretty easy to remember is cosine of x. So the slope at any point
along the [? line ?] sin of x is actually the
cosine of that point. That's also interesting. One day I'm going to do this
holographically because I think that might not be
sinking in properly. The derivative of cosine
of x is minus sin of x. There are good to memorize
though, because you'll be able to recall is quickly
on a test and then use it. And then finally the derivative
of tan of x is equal to 1 over cosine square of x which you
could also write as the secant squared of x. You might want to memorize
these now, and actually I encourage you to explore these
things, I encourage you to graph each of these functions. Graph a function, graph its
derivative and look at them, and really intuitively
understand why the derivative function actually does
describe the slope of the original function. And actually I'll probably
do a presentation on that. But I'm almost out of time
in this presentation, so just memorize these. And memorize the derivative of
e to the x, e to the x, and the natural log of x is 1/x. And in the next presentation
we're going to start mixing and matching all of these
functions, and we can use the product and chain rule on them
to solve kind of arbitrarily complex derivatives. Between what we've just seen,
we could probably solve 95% of the derivative problems
you'll see on say the calculus AP test. I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Derivatives (part 9)
Now that you've been introduced
into some of the other functions that we can take a
derivative of, we can now apply them using the chain
and the product rule. So let's do some
fun derivatives. And I think derivatives is
all about exposure, it's all about practice. So I just encourage you to do
as much practice as possible. And it's actually in some ways
a pretty mechanical thing to do and it's easier than a lot of
the math that you've learned before. Just maybe initially
looks a little abstract. So let's say that f of x is
equal to let's say the sin of 3x to the fifth plus 2x. So what is f prime of x? What is the derivative
of this function? Well, we use the
chain rule again. We take the derivative
of the inside. So what's the derivative
of the inside? Well, that's just 5 times 3 is
15 x to the fourth plus 2. And then we take the derivative
of the larger function. In the last presentation
we learned the derivative of sin is what? It's cosine. So it's times the cosine of
this expression right here. 3x to the fifth plus 2x. Pretty painless, no? Let's mix it up even more. Let's say that let me
switch colors just to not be monotonous. I'll pick powder blue. Very nice. Let's say that y and I'm
going to switch notation on purpose that you get used to
the various notations you can use. Let's say that y is equal to
let me think of something good e to the x times
cosine to the fifth of x. That looks daunting to me. Let's see if we can break
it down using the product and the chain rules. We want to figure out dy/dx. We want to figure out
the rate at which y changes relative to x. Or the derivative. Find the derivative
of both sides. Well, let's use
the product rule. Well, we're going to have
to use the chain and the product rules. So first we take the derivative
of this first term, and once again we learned in the last
presentation the most amazing fact, one of the most amazing
facts in the universe that the derivative of either
the x is what? It is e to the x. Blows my mind. e to the x. Once again I've taken the
derivative, and it's the same expression. Amazing. And then I multiply it
times a second expression. Cosine to the fifth of x. And now to that I add
the derivative of the second expression. Now this will be a little
bit more interesting. So this is cosine
of x to the fifth. This is just another way
of writing cosine of x to the fifth power. And I think that'll make it a
little bit more clear, that this cosine superscript
5, this is really just cosine to the fifth x. This means cosine
of x to the fifth. So now the derivative is
a little bit clearer. We can use the chain rule
and once again, we're just working on this right half. We take the derivative
of the inside. What's the derivative
of cosine of x? Yep you're right. Well, I don't know, I didn't
hear you so I don't know. I'll assume you're right. The derivative of cosine of x
is minus sin of x, and that's something you should memorize,
although you should prove it to yourself as well. So we take the derivative
of the inside minus sin. Derivative of cosine of x is
minus sin of x, and then we take the derivative
of the outside. We're just doing
the chain rule. So it's 5 cosine to
the fourth of x. So there we took the derivative
of this piece, and then we have to multiply times
this first piece. So that times e to the x. Interesting. You can simplify this if you
want, but you get the point. I mean simplifying it from
this point is really just kind of algebra. And I think you get the idea. Actually everything
we're doing is algebra. If you realize it looks like
something fairly complicated, but we just use the chain
and the product rules. Let's do some more. I will now switch to magenta. We want to take the derivative
dy/dx of let's see, some big expression. let me do something creative. Let's say the natural log
of x over 3x plus 10. So the natural log of
x over 3x plus 10. So you could use the quotient
rule if you took the time to memorize it, which I've never
taught you because it's really just the product rule. So I like to just rewrite
this as the product rule. So they're the same thing. Once again we're taking the
derivative, so I'm not going to keep rewriting this, but this
is the same thing as taking the derivative of the natural log
of x times 3x plus ten to the negative 1 power. 3x plus 10 in the denominator
is the same thing as 1 over 3x plus 10, which is the same
thing as 3x plus 10 to the negative 1 power. Now we can use the combination
of the product and the chain rules, and we
can solve this sucker. So let's do it. So we take the derivative of
this first term the natural log of x and we learned in the
last presentation the derivative of the natural log
of x is 1/x, which is pretty cool in of itself. And we multiply that
times a second term. So time 3x plus 10 to
the negative 1 power. And to that we add the
derivative of the second term, and we're going to multiply
that times the first term. So first we're going to have
to use the chain rule. We take the derivative
of the inside. Well the derivative of
the inside's easy. The derivative of 3x x plus 10. That's just 3. And then we take the derivative
of the whole thing, so it's negative 1. That's 3 times negative
1 times that whole expression to the minus 2. 3x plus 10. And of course this whole thing
times the natural log of x. We could simplify that. Let's see. This is 1/x and 3x plus
10 to negative 1. So we could rewrite this
as 1 over x 3x plus 10. Let's see. Plus 3 times minus 1. So we could say that's the
same thing as minus 3 ln of x over 3x plus 10 squared. I think you see how I
got from here to here. I just manipulated the
exponents and multiplied some numbers, et cetera, et cetera. Let's do one more. Just hit the point home. You really have the tools now
at your disposal to do a lot of derivative problems. Probably most of the derivative
problems you'll face in the first 1/2 year of calculus. I'm going to switch to green. Let's say y actually
I'm tired of y. Let's say that p is equal
to I don't know. Sin of x over cosine of x. Let's figure out what dp/dx. The rate at which
p changes to x. So once again this is the same
thing as sin of x times cosine of x to the negative 1. So we can just do the
product and chain rules. So the derivative
of the first term. Derivative of sin of x
is cosine of x, times the second term. Times cosine of x
to the minus 1. And then to that we add the
derivative of the second term. We have to use the
chain real here. So we take the derivative
of the inside. Well derivative of cosine
x is minus sin of x. And then times the
derivative of the outside. well that's minus 1 cosine of x
to the minus 2, and then we multiply that times the
first term, sin of x. So let's simplify that. So this is cosine of x
divided by cosine of x. You see how this cancels out? This is cosine of x over cosine
of x, so this is equal to 1. Cosine of x divided
cosine of x is 1. And then this minus sin cancels
out with this minus sin, and we have sin times sin
over cosine squared. So this is equal to 1. I'm going kind of fast because
I'm about to run out of time, but I think you get
what I'm doing. So this is sin squared x over
cosine squared x, which is actually equal to
what's sin over cosine? 1 plus 10 squared x. And if you know your trig
identities, that equals 1 over cosine squared of x. And, of course, what we just
proved is that the derivative of the tangent of x is equal
to the secant squared of x. I hope I thoroughly confused
you in that last problem. I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Proof: d/dx(x^n) | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I just did several videos on
the binomial theorem, so I think, now that they're done, I
think now is good time to do the proof of the derivative
of the general form. Let's take the derivative
of x to the n. Now that we know the
binomial theorem, we have the tools to do it. How do we take the derivative? Well, what's the classic
definition of the derivative? It is the limit as delta x
approaches zero of f of x plus delta x, right? So f of x plus delta x in this
situation is x plus delta x to the nth power, right? Minus f of x, well f of x
here is just x to the n. All of that over delta x. Now that we know the binomial
theorem we can figure out what the expansion of x plus
delta x is to the nth power. And if you don't know the
binomial theorem, go to my pre-calculus play list
and watch the videos on the binomial theorem. The binomial theorem tells us
that this is equal to I'm going to need some space for
this one the limit as delta x approaches zero. And what's the
binomial theorem? This is going to be equal to
I'm just going to do the numerator x to the
n plus n choose 1. Once again, review the binomial
theorem if this is looks like latin to you and you
don't know latin. n choose 1 of x to the n minus
1 delta x plus n choose 2 x to the n minus 2, that's x n
minus 2, delta x squared. Then plus, and we have a bunch
of the digits, and in this proof we don't have to go
through all the digits but the binomial theorem tells us what
they are and, of course, the last digit we just keep adding
is going to be 1 it would be n choose n which is 1. Let me just write that
down. n choose n. It's going to be x to the
zero times delta x to the n. So that's the
binomial expansion. Let me switch back to minus,
green that's x plus delta x to the n, so minus
x to the n power. That's x to the n, I know
I squashed it there. All of that over delta x. Let's see if we can simplify. First of all we have an x to
the n here, and at the very end we subtract out an x to the
n, so these two cancel out. If we look at every term here,
every term in the numerator has a delta x, so we can divide
the numerator and the denominator by delta x. This is the same thing
as 1 over delta x times this whole thing. So that is equal to the limit
as delta x approaches zero of, so we divide the top and the
bottom by delta x, or we multiply the numerator
times 1 over delta x. We get n choose 1 x
to the n minus 1. What's delta x divided by
delta x, that's just 1. Plus n choose 2, x
to the n minus 2. This is delta x squared, but
we divide by delta x we just get a delta x here. Delta x. And then we keep having a bunch
of terms, we're going to divide all of them by delta x. And then the last term is
delta x to the n, but then we're going to divide
that by delta x. So the last term becomes n
choose n, x to the zero is 1, we can ignore that. delta x
to the n divided by delta x. Well that's delta x
to the n minus 1. Then what are we doing now? Remember, we're taking
the limit as delta x approaches zero. As delta x approaches zero,
pretty much every term that has a delta x in it,
it becomes zero. When you multiply but
zero, you get zero. This first term has no
delta x in it, but every other term does. Every other term, even after
we divided by delta x has a delta x in it. So that's a zero. Every term is zero, all
of the other n minus 1 terms, they're all zeros. All we're left with is that
this is equal to n choose 1 of x the n minus 1. And what's n choose 1? That equals n factorial over 1
factorial divided by n minus 1 factorial times x
to the n minus 1. 1 factorial is 1. If I have 7 factorial divided
by 6 factorial, that's just 1. Or if I have 3 factorial
divided by 2 factorial, that's just 3, you can work it out. 10 factorial divided by
9 factorial that's 10. So n factorial divided
by n minus 1 factorial, that's just equal to n. So this is equal to n
times x to the n minus 1. That's the derivative
of x to the n. n times x to the n minus 1. We just proved the derivative
for any positive integer when x to the power n, where n
is any positive integer. And we see later it actually
works for all real numbers and the exponent. I will see you in
a future video. Another thing I wanted to point
out is, you know I said that we had to know the
binomial theorem. But if you think about it, we
really didn't even have to know the binomial theorem because we
knew in any binomial expansion I mean, you'd have
to know a little bit but if you did a little
experimentation you would realize that whenever you
expand a plus b to the nth power, first term is going to
be a to the n, and the second term is going to be plus n a to
the n minus 1 b. And then you are going to keep
having a bunch of terms. But these are the only terms
that are relevant to this proof because all the other terms get
canceled out when delta x approaches zero. So if you just knew that you
could have done this, but it's much better to do it with
the binomial theorem. Ignore what I just said
if it confused you. I'm just saying that we could
have just said the rest of these terms all go to zero. Anyway, hopefully you
found that fulfilling. I will see you in
future videos. 

Transcript for: Proof: d/dx(sqrt(x)) | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
So I've been requested to do
the proof of the derivative of the square root of x, so I
thought I would do a quick video on the proof of the
derivative of the square root of x. So we know from the definition
of a derivative that the derivative of the function
square root of x, that is equal to let me switch colors, just
for a variety that's equal to the limit as delta
x approaches 0. And you know, some people
say h approaches 0, or d approaches 0. I just use delta x. So the change in x over 0. And then we say f of x
plus delta x, so in this case this is f of x. So it's the square root of x
plus delta x minus f of x, which in this case it's
square root of x. All of that over the change
in x, over delta x. Right now when I look at that,
there's not much simplification I can do to make this come out
with something meaningful. I'm going to multiply the
numerator and the denominator by the conjugate of the
numerator is what I mean by that. Let me rewrite it. Limit is delta x approaching
0 I'm just rewriting what I have here. So I said the square root
of x plus delta x minus square root of x. All of that over delta x. And I'm going to multiply
that after switching colors times square root of x plus
delta x plus the square root of x, over the square root of x
plus delta x plus the square root of x. This is just 1, so I could of
course multiply that times if we assume that x and delta x
aren't both 0, this is a defined number and
this will be 1. And we can do that. This is 1/1, we're just
multiplying it times this equation, and we get limit
as delta x approaches 0. This is a minus b
times a plus b. Let me do little aside here. Let me say a plus b times
a minus b is equal to a squared minus b squared. So this is a plus b
times a minus b. So it's going to be
equal to a squared. So what's this quantity squared
or this quantity squared, either one, these are my a's. Well it's just going
to be x plus delta x. So we get x plus delta x. And then what's b squared? So minus square root of
x is b in this analogy. So square root of x
squared is just x. And all of that over delta
x times square root of x plus delta x plus the
square root of x. Let's see what
simplification we can do. Well we have an x and
then a minus x, so those cancel out. x minus x. And then we're left in the
numerator and the denominator, all we have is a delta x here
and a delta x here, so let's divide the numerator and the
denominator by delta x. So this goes to 1,
this goes to 1. And so this equals the limit
I'll write smaller, because I'm running out of space limit as
delta x approaches 0 of 1 over. And of course we can only do
this assuming that delta well, we're dividing by delta
x to begin with, so we know it's not 0, it's just
approaching zero. So we get square root
of x plus delta x plus the square root of x. And now we can just
directly take the limit as it approaches 0. We can just set delta
x as equal to 0. That's what it's approaching. So then that equals one
over the square root of x. Right, delta x is 0, so
we can ignore that. We could take the limit
all the way to 0. And then this is of course just
a square root of x here plus the square root of x,
and that equals 1 over 2 square root of x. And that equals 1/2x
to the negative 1/2. So we just proved that x to the
1/2 power, the derivative of it is 1/2x to the negative 1/2,
and so it is consistent with the general property that the
derivative of oh I don't know the derivative of x to
the n is equal to nx to the n minus 1, even in this case
where the n was 1/2. Well hopefully
that's satisfying. I didn't prove it for all
fractions but this is a start. This is a common one you
see, square root of x, and it's hopefully not too
complicated for proof. I will see you in
future videos. 

Transcript for: Proof: d/dx(ln x) = 1/x | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I'm now going to show you what
I think are probably the two coolest derivatives
in all of calculus. And I'll reserve that. None of the other ones have
occurred to me right now. But these are definitely to
me some of the neatest. So let's figure out
what the derivative of the natural log is. And just as a review,
what is the natural log? Well the natural log of
something is the exact same thing as saying logarithm
base e of that something. That's just a review. So let's take the
derivative of this. I think I'm going to need
a lot of space for this. I'm going to try to do it
as neatly as possible. So the derivative of the
natural log of x equals well let's just take the definition
of a derivative, right? We just take the slope at some
point and find the limit as we take the difference between
the two points to 0. So let's take the limit as
delta x approaches 0 of f of x plus delta x. So I'm going to take the
limit of this whole thing. The natural log ln of x plus
delta x right, that's like one point that I'm going to
take evaluate the function minus the ln of x. All of that over delta x. And if you remember from the
derivative videos, this is just the slope, and I'm just taking
the limit as I find the slope between a smaller and
a smaller distance. Hopefully you remember that. So let's see if we can do some
logarithm properties to simplify this a little bit. Hopefully you remember and if
you don't, review the logarithm properties but remember that
log of a minus log of b is equal to log of a over b, and
that comes out of the fact that logarithm expressions are
essentially exponents, so they follow the exponent rules. And if that doesn't make
sense to you, you should review those as well. But let's apply this logarithm
property to this equation. So let me rewrite the whole
thing, and I'm going to keep switching colors to keep it
from getting monotonous. So we have the limit as delta x
approaches 0 of this big thing. Let's see. So log of a minus b equals log
a over b, so this top, the numerator, will equal the
natural log of x plus delta x over x. Right? a b a/b, all of
that over delta x. And so that equals the limit as
delta x approaches 0 I think it's time to switch colors
again delta x approaches 0 of well let me just write
this 1 over delta x out in front. So this is 1 over delta x,
and we're going to take the limit of everything. ln x divided by x is 1
plus delta x over x. Fair enough. Now I'm going to throw out
another logarithm property, and hopefully you remember that
and let me put the properties separate so you know it's not
part of the proof that a log b is equal to log
of b to the a. And that comes from when you
take something to an exponent, and then to another exponent
you just have to multiply those two exponents. I don't want to confuse
you, but hopefully you should remember this. So how does apply here? Well this would be a log b. So this expression is the
same thing as the limit. The limit as delta x approaches
0 of the natural log of 1 plus delta x over x to the
1 over delta x power. And remember all this
is the natural log of this entire thing. And then we're going
to take the limit as delta x approaches 0. If you've watched the compound
interest problems and you know the definition of e, I think
this will start to look familiar. But let me make a substitution
that might clean things up a little bit. Let me make the substitution,
let me call it n no, no, no, let me call u is equal
to delta x over x. And then if that's true
then we can multiply both sides by x and we get
xu is equal to delta x. Or we would also know
that 1 over delta x is equal to 1 over xu. These are all equivalent. So let's make the substitution. So if we're taking the limit is
delta x approaches 0, in this expression if delta x
approaches 0, what does u approach? u approaches 0. So delta x approaching 0 is the
same exact thing as taking the limit as u approaches 0. So we can write this as the
limit as u approaches 0 of the natural log of 1 plus well we
did the substitution, delta x over x is now u to the 1
over delta x, and that same substitution told us that's the
same thing as one over xu. Remember we're taking the
natural log of everything. And we know this is an exponent
property, which I'll now do in a different color. We know that a to the bc
is equal to a to the b to the c power. So that tells us that this me
is equal to the limit as u approaches 0 of the natural log
of 1 plus u to the 1/u, because this is one over xu, right? 1/u, and then all of
that to the 1/x. And how did I do that? Just from this exponent
property, right? If I were to simplify this, I
would have 1/x times 1/u, and that's where I get
this 1 over xu. Well then we can just do this
logarithm property in reverse. If I have b to the a I can
put that a out front. So I could take this 1/x
and put it in front of the natural log. So now what do I have? We're almost there. We have the limit
as u approaches 0. Take that 1/x, put it in front
of the natural log sign. 1/x times the natural log
of 1 plus u to the 1/u. Fair enough. When we're taking the limit as
u approaches 0, x, this term doesn't involve it at all. So we could take this out in
front, because the limit doesn't affect this term. And then we're essentially
saying what happens to this expression as the limit
as u approaches 0. So this thing is equivalent to
1/x times the natural log of the limit as u approaches
0 of 1 plus u to the 1/u. And by now hopefully you
would recognize that this is the definition. This limit comes to e, if
you remember anything from compound interest. You might remember it as the
limit as n approaches infinity of 1 plus
1 over n to the n. But these things
are equivalent. If you just took the
substitution u is equal to 1/n, you would get this. You would just get this. So this expression right here
is e That expression is e. So we're getting close. So this whole thing is
equivalent to 1/x times the natural log, and this
we know, this is one of the ways to get to e. So the limit as u approaches
0 of 1 plus u to the 1/u. That is e. And what is the natural log? Well it's the log base e. So you know this is equal to
1/x times the log base e of e. So that's saying e
to what power is e. Well e to the first
power is e, right? This is equal to 1. So 1 times 1/x is equal to 1/x. There we have it. The derivative of the natural
log of x is equal to 1/x, which I find kind of neat, because
all of the other exponents lead to another exponent. But all of a sudden in the mix
here you have the natural log and the derivative of that
is equal to x to the negative 1 or 1/x. Fascinating. 

Transcript for: Proof: d/dx(e^x) = e^x | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's prove with the derivative
of e to the x's, and I think that this is one of the most
amazing things, depending on how you view it about either
calculus or math or the universe. Well we're essentially going to
prove I've already told you before that the derivative of e
to the x is equal to e to the x, which is amazing. The slope at any point of that
line is equal to the x value is equal to the function at
that point, not the x value. The slope at any
point is equal to e. That is mind boggling. And that also means that the
second derivative at any point is equal to the function of
that value or the third derivative, or the infinite
derivative, and that never ceases to amaze me. But anyway back to work. So how are we going
to prove this? Well we already proved I
actually just did it right before starting this video
that the derivative and some people actually call this
the definition of e. They go the other way around. They say there is some number
for which this is true, and we call that number e. So it could almost be viewed as
a little bit circular, but be we said that e is equal to the
limit as n approaches infinity of 1 over 1 plus n to the end. And then using this we actually
proved that derivative of ln of x is equal to 1/x. The derivative of log base
e of x is equal to 1/x. So now that we prove this out,
let's use this to prove this. Let me keep switching colors
to keep it interesting. Let's take the derivative
of ln of e to the x. This is almost trivial. This is equal to the logarithm
of a to the b is equal to b times the logarithm of a,
so this is equal to the derivative of x ln of e. And this is just saying e to
what power is equal to e. Well, to the first
power, right? So this just equals the
derivative of x, which we have shown as equal to 1. I think we have shown it,
hopefully we've shown it. If we haven't, that's actually
a very easy one to prove. OK fair enough. We did that. But let's do this another way. Let's use the chain rule. So what doe the chain rule say? If we have f of g of x, where
we have one function embedded in another one, the chain rule
say we take the derivative of the inside function, so
d/dx of e to the x. And then we take the derivative
of the outside function or the derivative of the outside
function with respect to the inner function. You can almost
view it that way. So the derivative ln
of e to the x with respect to e to the x. I know that's a
little confusing. You could have written a d e to
the x down over here, but I think you know the
chain rule by now. That is equal to 1
over e to the x. And that just comes from this. But instead of an x,
we have e to the x. So this is just a chain rule. Well what else do we know? We know that this is equal to
this, and we also know that this is equal to this. So this must be equal to this. So this must be equal to 1. Well let's just multiply
both sides of this equation by e to the x. We get on the left hand
side, we're just left with this expression. The derivative of e to the x
times- we're multiplying both sides by e to the x, times
e to the x over e to the x. I just chose to put the e
to the x on this term, is equal to e to the x. This is 1. Scratch it out. We're done. That might not have been
completely satisfying for you, but it works. The derivative of e to the
x is equal to e to the x. I think the school or the
nation should take a national holiday or something,
and people should just ponder this, because it
really is fascinating. But then actually this will
lead us to I would say even more dramatic results in the
not too far off future. Anyway, I'll see in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Proofs of derivatives of ln(x) and e^x | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
In the first version of the
video of the proof of the derivative of the natural
log of x, where the first time I proved this is
a couple of years ago. And the very next video I
proved that the derivative of e to the x is
equal to e to the x. I've been charged with some of
making a circular proof, and I'm pretty convinced that
my proof wasn't circular. So what I want to do in this
video, now that I have a little bit more space to work with, a
little bit more sophisticated tools, I'm going to redo the
proof and I'm going to do these in the same video to show you
at no point do I assume this before I actually show it. So let's start with the proof. So the first thing I need to do
is prove this thing up here. I want to keep track of this. I don't assume this until
I actually show it. So let's start with the
proof, the derivative of the natural log of x. So the derivative of the
natural log of x, we can just to go to the basic
definition of a derivative. It's equal to the limit as
delta x approaches 0 of the natural log of x plus delta x
minus the natural log of x. All of that over delta x. Now we can just use the
property of logarithms. If I have the log of a minus
the log of b, that's the same thing as a log of a over b. So let me re-write it that way. So this is going to be equal
to the limit as delta x approaches 0. I could take this 1 over
delta x right here. 1 over delta x times the
natural log of x plus delta x divided by this x. Just doing the logarithm
properties right there. Then I can re-write this 
first of all, when I have this coefficient in front of a
logarithm I can make this the exponent. And then I can simplify
this in here. So this is going to be equal to
the limit as delta x approaches 0 of the natural log  let
me do this in a new color. Let me do it in a
completely new color. The natural log of  the
inside here I'll just divide everything by x. So x divided by x is 1. Then plus delta x over x. Then I had this 1 over delta x
sitting out here, and I can make that the exponent. That's just an exponent
rule right there, or a logarithm property. 1 over delta x. Now I'm going to make
a substitution. Remember, all of this, this was
all just from my definition of a derivative. This was all equal to
the derivative of the natural log of x. I have still yet to
in any way use this. And I won't use that until
I actually show it to you. I've become very defensive
about these claims of circularity. They're my fault because that
shows that I wasn't clear enough in my earlier versions
of these proofs, so I'll try to be more clear this time. So let's see if we can
simplify this into terms that we recognize. Let's make the substitution so
that we can get e in maybe terms that we recognize. Let's make the substitute delta
x over x is equal to 1 over n. If we multiply  this
is the same thing. This is the equivalent
to substitution. If we multiply both sides of
this by x, as saying that delta x is equal to x over n. These are equivalent
statements. I just multiplied both
sides by x here. Now if we take the limit as n
approaches infinity of this term right here, that's
equivalent  that's completely equivalent to taking the limit
as delta x approaches 0. If we're defining delta x to be
this thing, and we take the limit as its denominator
approaches 0, we're going to make delta x go to 0. So let's make that
substitution. So all of this is going to be
equal to the limit as  now we've gotten rid
of our delta x. We're going to say the limit as
an approaches infinity of the natural log  I'll go back to
that mauve color  the natural log of 1 plus  now, I said
that instead of delta x over x, I made the substitution that
that is equal to 1 over n. So that's 1 plus 1 over n. And then what's 1 over delta x? Well delta x is equal to x over
n, so 1 over delta x is going to be the inverse of this. It's going to be n over x. And then we can re-write this
expression right here  let me re-write it again. This is equal to the limit as
n approaches infinity of the natural log of 1 plus 1 over n. What I can do is I can separate
out this n from the 1 over x. I could say this is to
the n, and then all of this to the 1 over x. Once again, this is just
an exponent property. If I raise something to the n
and then to the 1 over x, I could just multiply
the exponent to get to the n over x. So these two statements
are equivalent. But now we can use logarithm
properties to say hey, if this is the exponent, I can just
stick it out in front of the coefficient right here. I could put it out right there. And just remember, this was all
of the derivative with respect to x of the natural log of x. So what is that equal to? We could put this 1 out
of x in the front here. In fact, that 1 out of x term,
it has nothing to do with n. It's kind of a constant
term when you think of it in terms of n. So we can actually put it
all the way out here. We could put it either place. So we could say 1 over x times
all that stuff in mauve. The limit as n approaches
infinity of the natural log of 1 plus 1 over n to the n. The natural log of
all of that stuff. Or, just to make the point
clear, we can re-write this part  let me make a salmon
color  equal to 1 over x times the natural log of the
limit as n approaches infinity. I'm just switching places here,
because obviously what we care is what happens to this term as
it approaches infinity, of 1 plus 1 over n to the n. Well what is  this should
look a little familiar to you on some of the first videos
where we talked about e  this is one of the definitions of e. e is defined. I'm just being clear here. I'm still not using
this at all. I'm just stating that the
definition of e, e is equal to the limit as n approaches
infinity of 1 plus 1 over n to the n. This is just the
definition of e. And natural log is defined
to be the logarithm of base, this thing. So this thing is e. So I'm saying that the
derivative of the natural log of x is equal to 1 over x
times the natural log. This thing right here is e. That's what the
definition of e is. I'm not using the definition
of the derivative e, or the definition of the
derivative of e to the x. I'm just using the
definition of e. And the definition of
natural log is log base e. This says the power that you
have to raise e to to get to e, well this is just equal to 1. There we get that the
derivative of the natural log of x is equal to 1 over x. So, so far I think you'll be
satisfied that we've proven this first statement up here,
and in no way did we use this statement right here. I just used the definition
of e, but that's fine. I mean we assumed we know the
definition of e, even when we just talk about natural log,
we assume that it's base e. In no way did I assume
this to begin with. Now, given that we've shown
this and we didn't assume this at all, let's see
if we can show this. So the derivative  let's do a
little bit of an exercise here. Actually, I could probably
do it in the margins. Let's take the derivative
of this function. The natural log of e to the x. So there's two ways we
can approach this. The first way we could simplify
this and we could say this is the exact same thing
as the derivative. We could put this x out
front of x times the natural log of e. And what's the
natural log of e? The natural log of e we
already know is equal to 1. So this is just the
derivative of x. And the derivative
of x is equal to 1. So that's pretty
straightforward. The derivative, in no way did
we assume this to begin with. We just simplified this
expression to just this is the same thing as the derivative
of x, because this term cancels out. And the derivative
of x is just 1. Or we could do it
the other way. We could do the chain rule. We could say that this could be
viewed as the derivative of this inner function, of this
inner expression, so the derivative of the inner
expression, I don't know what that is. I'm not assuming
anything about it. I just don't know what it is. So I'll write it in
yellow right here. So it's equal to the
derivative with respect to x of e to the x. I don't know what this is. I have no clue what this
is, and I haven't assumed anything about what it is. I'm just using the chain rule. If the derivative of this
inside function with respect to x, which is this right here,
times the derivative of this outside function with respect
to the inside function. So the derivative of natural
log of x with respect to x is 1 over x. So the derivative of natural
log of anything with respect to anything is
1 over that anything. So it's going to be equal to 
so the derivative of natural log of x with respect to e to
the x is equal to 1 over e to the x. Once again, I in no way
assumed this right here. So far in anything we've done,
we haven't assumed that. But clearly, my derivatives,
either way I solve it  one way I solve it I got 1. The other way, I kind
of didn't solve it. I got this expression
right here. They must be equal
to each other. So let me write that down. This must be equal to that. It's just we just looked at it
two different ways and got two different results. But I still don't know
what this thing is. I just left it kind of open. I just said whatever
the derivative of e to the x happens to be. But we know, since these two
expressions are equal, we know that the derivative with
respect to x of whatever e to the x  so whatever the
derivative with respect to x of e to the x happens to be, we
know that when we multiply that times 1 over e to the x 
that's when we just did the chain rule  that we should
get the same result as when we approached the problem
the other way. That should be equal to this
approach because they're both different ways of looking
at the derivative of the natural log of e to the x. So that should be equal to 1. Well, we're almost there. We could just simplify this
and solve for our mystery derivative of e to the x. Multiply both sides of this
equation by e to the x, and you get the derivative with respect
to x of e to the x is equal to e to the x. And I want to clarify this. At no point in this entire
proof, at no point did I assume this. In fact, this is the
first time that I'm even making the statement. I didn't have to assume this
when I showed you that the derivative of the natural
log of x is 1 over x. And I didn't have to assume
this to kind of get to it. So in no way is this
proof circular. So anyway, I didn't want to
appear defensive, but I wanted to clarify this up. Because I don't want to in any
way blame those who think that my original proof was circular. It's my fault because I
didn't explain it properly. So hopefully this should
provide a little bit of clarity on the issue. 

Transcript for: Extreme derivative word problem (advanced) | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I just got sent this
problem, and it's a pretty meaty problem. A lot harder than what
you'd normally find in most textbooks. So I thought it would help
us all to work it out. And it's one of those problems
that when you first read it, your eyes kind of glaze over,
but when you understand what they're talking about, it's
reasonably interesting. So they say, the curve in the
figure above is the parabola y is equal to x squared. So this curve right there is
y is equal to x squared. Let us define a normal line as
a line whose first quadrant intersection with the parabola
is perpendicular to the parabola. So this is the first
quadrant, right here. And they're saying that a
normal line is something, when the first quadrant intersection
with the parabola is normal to the parabola. So if I were to draw a tangent
line right there, this line is normal to that tangent line. That's all that's saying. So this is a normal
line, right there. Normal line. Fair enough. 5 normal lines are
shown in the figure. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Good enough. And these all look
perpendicular, or normal to the parabola in the first
quadrant intersection, so that makes sense. For a while, the x-coordinate
of the second quadrant intersection of the normal line
of the parabola gets smaller, as the x-coordinate of the
first quadrant intersection gets smaller. So let's see what happens as
the x-quadrant of the first intersection gets smaller. So this is where I left
off in that dense text. So if I start at this point
right here, my x-coordinate right there would look
something like this. Let me go down. my x-coordinate is
right around there. And then as I move to a smaller
x-coordinate to, say, this one right here, what happened
to the normal line? Or even more important, what
happened to the intersection of the normal line in
the second quadrant? This is the second
quadrant, right here. So when I had a larger
x-value here, my normal line intersected here,
in the second quadrant. Then when I brought my x-value
in, when I lowered my x-value, my x-value here, because this
is the next point, right here, my x-value at the intersection
here, went actually, their wording is bad. They're saying that
the second quadrant intersection gets smaller. But actually, it's not
really getting smaller. It's getting less negative. I guess smaller could be just
absolute value or magnitude, but it's just getting
less negative. It's moving there, but
it's actually becoming a larger number, right? It's becoming less negative,
but a larger number. But if we think in absolute
value, I guess it's getting smaller, right? As we went from that point to
that point, as we moved the x in for the intersection of the
first quadrant, the second quadrant intersection also
moved in a bit, from that line to that line. Fair enough. But eventually, a normal line
second quadrant intersection gets as small as it can get. So if we keep lowering our
x-value in the first quadrant, so we keep on pulling in the
first quadrant, as we get to this point. And then this point intersects
the second quadrant, right there. And then, if you go even
smaller x-values in the first quadrant then your normal line
starts intersecting in the second quadrant, further and
further negative numbers. So you can kind of view this
as the highest value, or the smallest absolute value, at
which the normal line can intersect in the
second quadrant Let me make that clear. Up here, you were intersecting
when you had a large x in the first quadrant, you had a large
negative x in the second quadrant intersection. And then as you lowered your
x-value, here, you had a smaller negative value. Up until you got to this point,
right here, you got this, which you can view as the smallest
negative value could get, and then when you pulled in your x
even more, these normal lines started to push out again,
out in the second quadrant. That's, I think, what
they're talking about. The extreme normal line
is shown as a thick line in the figure. Right. This is the extreme normal
line, right there. So this is the extreme
one, that deep, bold one. Extreme normal line. After this point, when you pull
in your x-values even more, the intersection in your second
quadrant starts to push out some. And you can think of the
extreme case, if you draw the normal line down here, your
intersection with the second quadrant is going to be way out
here someplace, although it seems like it's kind of
asymptoting a little bit. But I don't know. Let's read the rest
of the problem. Once the normal line passes
the extreme normal line, the x-coordinates of their second
quadrant intersections what the parabola start to increase. And they're really, when they
say they start to increase, they're actually just
becoming more negative. That wording is bad. I should change this to
more, more negative. Or they're becoming
larger negative numbers. Because once you get below
this, then all of a sudden the x-intersections start
to push out more in the second quadrant. Fair enough. The figures show 2
pairs of normal lines. Fair enough. The 2 normal lines of a pair
have the same second quadrant intersection with the parabola,
but 1 is above the extreme normal line, in the first
quadrant, the other is below it. Right, fair enough. For example, this guy right
here, this is when we had a large x-value. He intersects with the
second quadrant there. Then if you lower and lower the
x-value, if you lower it enough, you pass the extreme
normal line, and then you get to this point, and then this
point, he intersects, or actually, you go to this point. So if you pull in your x-value
enough, you once again intersect at that same point
in the second quadrant. So hopefully I'm making some
sense to you, as I try to make some sense of this problem. OK. Now what do they want to know? And I think I only have time
for the first part of this. Maybe I'll do the second
part in the another video. Find the equation of the
extreme normal line. Well, that seems very daunting
at first, but I think our toolkit of derivatives, and
what we know about equations of a line, should be
able to get us there. So what's the slope of
the tangent line at any point on this curve? Well, we just take the
derivative of y equals x squared, and y prime
is just equal to 2x. This is the slope of the
tangent at any point x. So if I want to know the slope
of the tangent at x0, at some particular x, I would just
say, well, let me just say, slope, it would be 2 x0. Or let me just say, f of
x0 is equal to 2 x0. This is the slope at
any particular x0 of the tangent line. Now, the normal line slope
is perpendicular to this. So the perpendicular line, and
I won't review it here, but the perpendicular line has a
negative inverse slope. So the slope of normal line at
x0 will be the negative inverse of this, because this is the
slope of the tangent line x0. So it'll be equal to
minus 1 over 2 x0. Fair enough. Now, what is the equation of
the normal line at x0 let's say that this is my x0 in question. What is the equation of
the normal line there? Well, we can just use
the point-slope form of our equation. So this point right here
will be on the normal line. And that's the
point x0 squared. Because this the graph of
y equals x0, x squared. So this normal line will
also have this point. So we could say that the
equation of the normal line, let me write it down, would
be equal to, this is just a point-slope definition
of a line. You say, y minus the y-point,
which is just x0 squared, that's that right there, is
equal to the slope of the normal line minus 1 over
2 x0 times x minus the x-point that we're at. Minus x, minus x0. This is the equation
of the normal line. So let's see. And what we care about is when
x0 is greater than 0, right? We care about the normal line
when we're in the first quadrant, we're in all of
these values right there. So that's my equation
of the normal line. And let's solve it
explicitly in terms of x. So y is a function of x. Well, if I add x0 squared
to both sides, I get y is equal to, actually, let
me multiply this guy out. I get minus 1/2 x0 times x, and
then I have plus, plus, because I have a minus times
a minus, plus 1/2. The x0 and the over the
x0, they cancel out. And then I have to add
this x0 to both sides. So all I did so far, this is
just this part right there. That's this right there. And then I have to add this to
both sides of the equation, so then I have plus x0 squared. So this is the equation of the
normal line, in mx plus b form. This is its slope, this is
the m, and then this is its y-intercept right here. That's kind of the b. Now, what do we care about? We care about where
this thing intersects. We care about where it
intersects the parabola. And the parabola, that's pretty
straightforward, that's just y is equal to x squared. So to figure out where they
intersect, we just have to set the 2 y's to be
equal to each other. So they intersect, the x-values
where they intersect, x squared, this y would have
to be equal to that y. Or we could just substitute
this in for that y. So you get x squared is equal
to minus 1 over 2 x0 times x, plus 1/2 plus x0 squared. Fair enough. And let's put this in a
quadratic equation, or try to solve this, so we can apply
the quadratic equation. So let's put all of this
stuff on the lefthand side. So you get x squared plus
1 over 2 x0 times x minus all of this, 1/2 plus x0
squared is equal to 0. All I did is, I took all of
this stuff and I put it on the lefthand side of the equation. Now, this is just a standard
quadratic equation, so we can figure out now where the
x-values that satisfy this quadratic equation will tell
us where our normal line and our parabola intersect. So let's just apply the
quadratic equation here. So the potential x-values,
where they intersect, x is equal to minus b, I'm
just applying the quadratic equation. So minus b is minus 1 over
2 x0, plus or minus the square root of b squared. So that's that squared. So it's one over four
x0 squared minus 4ac. So minus 4 times 1 times
this minus thing. So I'm going to have a minus
times a minus is a plus, so it's just 4 times this,
because there was one there. So plus 4 times
this, right here. 4 times this is just
2 plus 4 x0 squared. All I did is, this
is 4ac right here. Well, minus 4ac. The minus and the minus
canceled out, so you got a plus. There's a 1. So 4 times c is just
2 plus 4x squared. I just multiply this by two,
and of course all of this should be over 2 times
a. a is just 2 there. So let's see if I
can simplify this. Remember what we're doing. We're just figuring out where
the normal line and the parabola intersect. Now, what do we get here. This looks like a little
hairy beast here. Let me see if I can simplify
this a little bit. So let us factor out
let me rewrite this. I can just divide everything by
1/2, so this is minus 1 over 4 x0, I just divided this by 2,
plus or minus 1/2, that's just this 1/2 right there, times the
square root, let me see what I can simplify out of here. So if I factor out a 4 over
x0 squared, then what does my expression become? This term right here will
become an x to the fourth, x0 to the fourth, plus, now,
what does this term become? This term becomes
a 1/2 x0 squared. And just to verify this,
multiply 4 times 1/2, you get 2, and then the x0
squares cancel out. So write this term times that,
will equal 2, and then you have plus now we factored a four
out of this and the x0 squared, so plus 1/16. Let me scroll over
a little bit. And you can verify
that this works out. If you were to multiply this
out, you should get this business right here. I see the home stretch here,
because this should actually factor out quite neatly. So what does this equal? So the intersection of
our normal line and our parabola is equal to this. Minus 1 over 4 x0 plus or
minus 1/2 times the square root of this business. And the square root, this
thing right here is 4 over x0 squared. Now what's this? This is actually, lucky
for us, a perfect square. And I won't go into details,
because then the video will get too long, but I think you can
recognize that this is x0 squared, plus 1/4. If you don't believe me,
square this thing right here. You'll get this
expression right there. And luckily enough, this is
a perfect square, so we can actually take the
square root of it. And so we get, the point
at which they intersect, our normal line and our
parabola, and this is quite a hairy problem. The points where they intersect
is minus 1 over 4 x0, plus or minus 1/2 times the
square root of this. The square root of this is the
square root of this, which is just 2 over x0 times the square
root of this, which is x0 squared plus 1/4. And if I were to rewrite all of
this, I'd get minus 1 over 4 x0 plus, let's see, this 1/2 and
this 2 cancel out, right? So these cancel out. So plus or minus, now I
just have a one over x0 times x0 squared. So I have 1 over x0 oh sorry,
let me, we have to be very careful there x0 squared
divided by x0 is just x0, let me do that in a yellow color so
you know what I'm dealing with. This term multiplied by this
term is just x0, and then you have a plus 1/4 x0. And this is all a
parentheses here. So these are the two points at
which the normal curve and our parabola intersect. Let me just be very clear. Those 2 points are, for if
this is my x0 that we're dealing with, right there. It's this point and this point. And we have a plus or minus
here, so this is going to be the plus version, and this is
going to be the minus version. In fact, the plus version
should simplify into x0. Let's see if that's the case. Let's see if the plus version
actually simplifies to x0. So these are our two points. If I take the plus version,
that should be our first quadrant intersection. So x is equal to minus 1/4
x0 plus x0 plus 1/4 x0. And, good enough, it does
actually cancel out. That cancels out. So x0 is one of the points
of intersection, which makes complete sense. Because that's how we even
defined the problem. But, so this is the first
quadrant intersection. So that's the first
quadrant intersection. The second quadrant
intersection will be where we take the minus
sign right there. So x, I'll just call it in the
second quadrant intersection, it'd be equal to minus 1/4 x0
minus this stuff over here, minus the stuff there. So minus x0 minus
1 over 4 mine x0. Now what do we have? So let's see. We have a minus 1 over 4
x0, minus 1 over 4 x0. So this is equal to minus x0,
minus x0, minus 1 over 2 x0. So if I take minus 1/4 minus
1/4, I get minus 1/2. And so my second quadrant
intersection, all this work I did got me this result. My second quadrant
intersection, I hope I don't run out of space. My second quadrant
intersection, of the normal line and the parabola, is
minus x0 minus 1 over 2 x0. Now this by itself is a pretty
neat result we just got, but we're unfortunately not
done with the problem. Because the problem wants us to
find that point, the maximum point of intersection. They call this the
extreme normal line. The extreme normal line is
when our second quadrant intersection essentially
achieves a maximum point. I know they call it the
smallest point, but it's the smallest negative value, so
it's really a maximum point. So how do we figure out
that maximum point? Well, we have our second
quadrant intersection as a function of our
first quadrant x. I could rewrite this as, my
second quadrant intersection as a function of x0 is equal to
minus x minus 1 over 2 x0. So this is going to reach a
minimum or a maximum point when its derivative is equal to 0. This is a very unconventional
notation, and that's probably the hardest
thing about this problem. But let's take this derivative
with respect to x0. So my second quadrant
intersection, the derivative of that with respect to x0, is
equal to, this is pretty straightforward. It's equal to minus 1, and then
I have a minus 1/2 times, this is the same thing as
x to the minus 1. So it's minus 1 times x0
to the minus 2, right? I could have rewritten
this as minus 1/2 times x0 to the minus 1. So you just put its
exponent out front and decrement it by 1. And so this is the derivative
with respect to my first quadrant intersection. So let me simplify this. So x, my second quadrant
intersection, the derivative of it with respect to my first
quadrant intersection, is equal to minus 1, the minus 1/2 and
the minus 1 become a positive when you multiply them, and so
plus 1/2 over x0 squared. Now, this'll reach a maximum
or minimum when it equals 0. So let's set that equal to
0, and then solve this problem right there. Well, we add one to both sides. We get 1 over 2 x0 squared is
equal to 1, or you could just say that that means that 2 x0
squared must be equal to 1, if we just invert both
sides of this equation. Or we could say that x0 squared
is equal to 1/2, or if we take the square roots of both sides
of that equation, we get x0 is equal to 1 over the
square root of 2. So we're really, really,
really close now. We've just figured out the
x0 value that gives us our extreme normal line. This value right here. Let me do it in a
nice deeper color. This value right here, that
gives us the extreme normal line, that over there is
x0 is equal to 1 over the square root of 2. Now, they want us to figure
out the equation of the extreme normal line. Well, the equation of the
extreme normal line we already figured out right here. It's this. The equation of the normal line
is that thing, right there. So if we want the equation of
the normal line at this extreme point, right here, the one that
creates the extreme normal line, I just substitute 1 over
the square root of 2 in for x0. So what do I get? I get, and this is the home
stretch, and this is quite a beast of a problem. y minus x0 squared. x0 squared is 1/2, right? 1 over the square root
of 2 squared is 1/2. Is equal to minus 1 over 2 x0. So let's be careful here. So minus 1/2 times 1 over x0. One over x0 is the square
root of 2, right? All of that times x minus x0. So that's 1 over the square
root of 2. x0 is one over square root of 2. So let's simplify
this a little bit. So the equation of our normal
line, assuming I haven't made any careless mistakes, is
equal to, so y minus 1/2 is equal to, let's see. If we multiply this minus
square root of 2 over 2x, and then if I multiply these
square root of 2 over this, it becomes one. And then I have a minus
and a minus, so that I have a plus 1/2. I think that's right. Yeah, plus 1/2, this
times this times that is equal to plus 1/2. And then, we're at
the home stretch. So we just add 1/2 to both
sides of this equation, and we get our extreme normal line
equation, which is y is equal to minus square
root of 2 over 2x. If you add 1/2 to both sides of
this equation, you get plus 1. And there you go. That's the equation of that
line there, assuming I haven't made any careless mistakes. But even if I have, I think you
get the idea of hopefully how to do this problem, which
is quite a beastly one. 

Transcript for: Implicit Differentiation
Welcome to the video on
implicit differentiation. Let's just explain the
difference between implicit and explicit first. So if I had a function that
was, let's say, y is equal to x squared plus 2x plus 3. In this situation, y, the
variable y, is defined explicitly in terms of x. How do I know that? Well, if you give me an x, I
can just input it into this expression right there,
and I explicitly get y. Right? It just pops out
of the equation. But on the other hand, what if
I had something like this. What if I had x squared plus
y squared is equal to 100. Well now, if I give you an x,
you still can figure out a y, but it's just not as easy. Right? If I said, x is equal to, I
don't know, x is equal to 9, you would put 9 in here, you
would get 81, plus y squared is equal to 100, you'd subtract
that, you'd get y squared is equal to, what, 19? Those numbers are weird. And then you'd get y is
equal to the plus or minus square root of 19. So you still could solve for
y, but this expression right here, or this equation,
defines y implicitly. And that's a different, you
know, when people use the word explicit or implicit
in everyday language, it's the same thing. When you say, he
explicitly said this, it means, I am hungry. I explicitly stated
that I'm hungry. But you could implicitly
state that you're hungry. You could say, oh well, you
know, I haven't eaten for a long time, and you know, boy,
it would be nice to maybe eat something, and that would
be kind of an implicit expression of your hunger. Because someone would have to
kind of do a little bit of work to come to the conclusion that
you're hungry, instead of you telling them. So with that out of the
way, let's actually do some differentiation. So everything you've learned
about differentiation right now has been explicit
differentiation. So example. For this function, we know
how to take the explicit derivative here. Well, it's an explicitly
defined function, so we just take the derivative. We apply the
derivative operator. We take the rate of change of
both sides of this equation with respect to x. You could do it like this. We're taking the derivative
operator, I know this is getting messy, we're taking the
derivative operator on that side, and we're also taking the
derivative operator on this side. I didn't plan to write
that there that's why so it happens. On the left side, the rate
of change at y changes with respect to x, well
we just write that. The rate of change of y,
for every small change in y, what is change in x. That equals and then,
we know how to do this type of derivative. This is just a
simple quadratic. So it equals 2x plus 2 plus 0. So there. We just did some explicit
differentiation. So how do we do the
same thing here? Well, we're going to
do the same thing. We're going to apply the
derivative operator to both sides of this equation. So let me do that, I'll do
that in a different color. Let me erase all of this,
too, because this is kind of obvious things that
you might already know. Let me erase all of that. OK, so I'll take the derivative
operator to both sides of this equation. So this is no different
than what we did up here. And as you learned in algebra,
anything you do to one side of the equation, you have to do to
the other side of the equation. Otherwise it would no
longer be an equation. Take the derivative operator
because we're taking the derivative with respect to x. We could've taken it
with respect to y. x squared plus y squared is
equal to, have to take the derivative of both
sides, right? Derivative of 100 with
respect to x, right? So this equals the derivative
with respect to x, let me put it in brackets. I was going to do parentheses,
but I think brackets. Of x squared, plus the
derivative with respect to x of y squared. And what's the derivative
with respect to x of 100? For every change in x, how
much does this change? Well, it doesn't change at all. It's going to stay 100, right? So this is 0. The derivative of a constant,
really with respect to any changing variable,
is going to be 0. So that was just 0. And what's the derivative of
x squared with respect to x? Well, we did that
up here, right? When we took this derivative,
we just took the derivative of each of these terms, the
derivative of x squared with respect to x, that's just 2x. So we get 2x plus now this
term here is where you might get a little bit confused. I am taking the derivative of
y squared with respect to x. So let me take you
[? on the side. ?] You know you shouldn't do this
every time that you do one of these implicit differentiation
problems, but I'm doing this because I want you to
understand what we're doing. So let's say I just defined g
as equal to y squared, right? So let's say this was g. And I want to take
the derivative of g with respect to x. So I apply the derivative
operator on both sides of this, so let me do that. So the derivative, let me
do a d of x on that side, d of x on that side. That's a d, there you go. So what we get is the
derivative of g with respect to x is equal to the derivative
with respect to x of y squared. And so far, we haven't
really done much. I've just rewrote things. But what does the
chain rule tell us? The chain rule tells us that
the derivative, let me stay in the same color. I'm always switching colors. The derivative of any variable
with respect to x, or with respect to another variable, is
equal to the derivative of g with respect to y times
the derivative of y with respect to x. And if you don't have the full
intuition of the chain rule yet, there's a couple
of ways to do it. You know, all of these dg's and
dy's that you see throughout integral and differential
calculus, all these really mean are really, really, really,
really, small change in g, a really, really, really, small
change in y, a really, really, small change in x. So you can almost view these,
if you multiply this out, this really, really small change in
y is the same as this really, really small change in y. So these are
essentially fractions. So you could cancel these out,
and that's why you would get the change in g with respect to
x, or the derivative of g with respect to x. So this is what the
chain rule tells us. So given that this is what the
chain rule tells us, how does that help us figuring out this? Well, we know that the
derivative of g with respect to x is equal to the derivative
of g with respect to y. But we already know that
g is equal to y squared. I just made that definition. That's where we started from. So what's the derivative
of g with respect to y? Well, that's just 2y, right,
just using our derivative rules, or our polynomial rules,
which hopefully you believe actually work, because there
are several videos where we prove it. And then, times the derivative
of y with respect to x. Which we don't know, and that's
actually kind of what we're going to try to solve for. So the derivative of g with
respect to x is 2y times the derivative of y
with respect to x. Well, g is just the same
thing is y squared, right? So the derivative
of, this is g. And normally when you do this,
you don't have to go through the whole problem of
substituting for g. I just wanted to give
you that intuition. So what's this
derivative right here? Well, it's going to be the
derivative of this expression with respect to y, from the
chain rule, so that's 2y. Times the derivative of y with
respect to x is equal to 0. When you do it mechanically,
it's actually quite simple. You just say, oh, well, let me
pretend like y is like an x, take a derivative, and
I multiply it times the derivative of y
with respect to x. Mechanically it's very simple,
but I really want you to understand that intuition that
this is coming out of the chain rule. And actually, the chain
rule itself is not this bizarre concept. It's really, you're just
multiplying fractions. So let me clear up some
space here, and we can finish this problem. And then I'll do a problem
where you have to do implicit differentiation. And even in this one that I
just gave, it's really useful to do implicit differentiation. So let me, I could clear this
guy out up here, clear that out, clear all of this
stuff out, there we go. Clear all of that out. Ready to do some more work. So now we can solve this
for the derivative of y with respect to x. So we get, let's subtract
2x from both sides. We get 2y dy dx is equal to
I'm just subtracting 2x from both sides minus 2x. And then what do we get? We get dy over dx is equal to,
divide both sides by 2y, the 2's cancel out, you
get minus x over y. And this is interesting,
just as it is, right? Because what was this? This was the equation for a
circle with radius 10, right? You know, r squared. And if you know your
trigonometry and all of that, this tells you that the slope
of a circle, at any point, is equal to the negative
of x over the y. Well, we know from trigonometry
that the x is the cosine, and the y is the sine, and so that
tells you something interesting about how the derivative is
related to the tangent and all of that. But I won't go into that. We're just learning implicit
differentiation here. But it's sometimes it's fun
to just think about things. So how's this different
from everything else we learned so far? Well, here we have the
derivative, the derivative is actually a function of both
the x and the y value. And if we feel really
uncomfortable having this y here, if we don't like that,
what we could do, is we can substitute. So let's solve for y here. We get y squared is equal to
100, minus x squared, and then you get why is equal to the
plus or minus square root of 100 minus x squared. So you just substitute
that in here. Another way of writing
the derivative of y with respect to x, sometimes
you'll see y prime. I'm just switching
notation, just so you're familiar with it. Is equal to minus x over the
plus or minus square root of 100 minus x squared. And to some degree, since we
have plus or minus down here, this minus sign kind of
doesn't matter, right? Because when it's a minus here
it becomes a plus, when it's plus it's minuses, so you
can kind of ignore this. That's something interesting
for you to think about as well. Anyway. And this is interesting,
because our traditional way of solving derivatives, we had
never seen a plus or minus here. So that might be a little
bit interesting to you. So now let's do a problem
that is actually a bit of a trick problem. It's not a trick problem but
it's actually something, that I think, I first saw it either
when I was practicing for the AP Calculus exam, or actually
saw it on the AP Calculus exam. So it's something that
you might encounter. But it's really neat. Let's say I have y is
equal to x to the x. So first, you say,
oh, this looks easy. Maybe I could use the
power rule, but no. Chain rule, you have 2 x's
here, and I mean, you might want to just pause and think
about this for a little bit, because this actually isn't
that straightforward of a problem. And even though right here, y
is explicitly defined in terms of x, right, if I give you x,
if I say x is 3, well then y is 3 to the third, y is 27. So this is an
explicit function. I explicitly defined
y in terms of x. But it's very hard to
differentiate explicitly. And here's the trick. Let's take the natural log, or
actually you could take any logarithm, but let's take
the natural log on both sides of this equation. So you get the natural log of
y is equal to the natural log of x to the x. And why did I do that? Because now I can use
what we know about logarithm properties. We know that log of a to the
b is equal to b log of a. And you can watch the
exponent properties videos, if you forgot that. So let's rewrite this
using this property. And I'm going to switch colors. So we get the natural log
of y is equal to x times the natural log of x. And now we can implicitly
differentiate this. So let's take the derivative
with respect to x of both sides of this equation. And I'll switch colors again. d dx. And I'm writing this just so
you know what I'm doing. is equal to d dx of
x natural log of x. So the derivative of this
expression with respect to x is equal to the derivative of this
expression with respect to y, times the derivative of
y with respect to x. So what's the derivative of
this with respect to y? What's 1/y? 1/y times the derivative, just
the chain rule, the derivative of y with respect to x. dy dx is equal to and
remember, just mechanically, if you want to make sure you're
doing it right, you just take the derivative with respect to
y, and you multiply it times dy dy. That's just the chain room. Equals, and now we take
the derivative of this. Well, now we can just
use the product rule. The derivative of
the first, right? It's this times this. So what's the derivative of x? It's 1. So it's 1 times the natural log
of x plus the derivative of the second term, 1/x, times
the first term, times x. Let me clear that out up there. I'm already over time, but I've
become a YouTube partner, so my videos can be longer. But I don't want to make
them too long, because you'll get bored. All right. So let's simplify this. We get 1/y dy dx is equal to
the natural log of x, plus, well, that just cancels
out and becomes 1, right? And so we have the derivative
of y with respect to x is equal to y. I'm just multiplying both sides
of this equation times y. y times the natural
log of x plus 1. Now, you might say you're done,
but some people just don't like it, the change of y with
respect to x, they don't like it being defined in terms of y. So let's substitute. We know that y is
equal x to the x. So that equals x to the x times
the natural log of x plus one. So another way of saying it is
that y prime, or the change in y with respect to x, or the
slope at any point of this curve, is equal to x to the x,
natural log of x, plus x to the x. I just distributed
the x to the x. But that's pretty neat. This is kind of a, you know, a
five-star problem that you might see in your books, and
you might see it in a math competition, and people
will be really impressed. And they'd be even more
impressed if you kind of recognized this pattern, and
you're able to find the antiderivative of it, and
recognize that it is x to the x. Anyway, I've talked
for too long. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Implicit Differentiation (part 2)
I've been requested to do some
more implicit differentiation or differentiation of implicit
functions by I believe his name is [? Akash ?], so I
will do some more. And these are actually the
problems that he sent to me and they looked good, so those
are the ones I'll do. The first problem he gave me,
and I'll do it in green, says y to the third power minus xy
squared plus cosine xy is equal to 2. So like all differentiation of
implicit functions and of course in these examples I'm
going to except for the last one I'm going to find
the derivative of y with respect to x. So in all of these I
want to figure out what dy/dx is equal to. Well to do that just like in
the previous video we just take the derivative with respect to
x on both sides of this equation. So we do the derivative
operator I guess we could call it. So we're going to take
it on this side. ddx. And we're going to take the
derivative of everything. Then we're going to take the
derivative on the right hand side, the derivative of 2,
which we know hopefully by this point is 0. And I'll do it a little bit
quicker than in last video, but anyway send me a note if you
think I did it too fast. So let's take the derivative
of each of these terms. So the derivative with
respect to x of y cubed. Well it's the derivative with
respect to y, we're just doing the chain rule. So it's 3y that's a y,
not a g 3y squared. So the derivative of this
function with respect to y times the derivative of
y with respect to x. dy/dx. That's just the chain rule. And then we have minus
the derivative of this with respect to x. Well this is a little
interesting, because here we have x times y squared, which
we're arguing is maybe a function of what's an
implicit function of x. So how do we do that? What we'll do let me put the
subtraction sign outside and then let's do the derivative
inside, and I'll do it inside some brackets. So let's do the
product rule here. We have x times y squared. The product rule says it's the
derivative of the first function times a second
function plus the derivative of the second function times
the first function. So the derivative of the first
function with respect to x remember what we're taking the
derivative with respect to well the derivative
of x is just 1. 1 times y squared plus
the derivative of the second function. Well what's the derivative
of the second function? Well it's going to be 2y
dy/dx, and that just comes from the chain rule. The derivative with respect
to y times the derivative of y with respect to x. That's the chain rule. So that's the derivative of y
squared, and then we multiply that times the first
function, which is x. Times x. Hopefully that
didn't confuse you. Just took the derivative
of x times y squared. This is the product rule. Plus the derivative
of y squared, which was this times x. OK now we're ready to move on. OK. Now this is interesting. This is interesting. We have to take the
derivative of cosine of xy. Well once again we just
do the chain rule. And maybe I'll actually break
it up into a couple of steps here just so that you don't
get completely confused. So what does the chain rule say
if we have you know f of g of x of whatever whatever? We essentially have to take the
derivative of the inside function and multiply or well
I guess you could do it two ways. You could say we take the
entire derivative with respect to whatever this function is. You know if g was equal to xy
we could say the derivative of cosine of g with respect to g. And then we would multiply
that times the derivative of this with respect to x. If that confuses you, I think
it'll make more sense when I actually do the example. Actually let me write out like
just the way I said it, because I think that could maybe even
clear up some confusion over the chain rule. Or maybe it'll
confuse you further. So what are we doing? We're going to do the
derivative let me do this in a different color. So let's take derivative
of the outside function with respect to xy. So what is that? What's the derivative
of cosine of x? Or let's say if it was
g is equal to xy. If g is equal to xy, then
that expression there is cosine of g. So what's the derivative of
this with respect to g? Sorry, dg. Well that's just minus
sin of g, right? So let me do that in
a different color. So it's minus sin,
and g was just xy. So that's the derivative
of you can kind of say of the outside function. And then we go to the inside,
and we have to multiply this times the derivative of
this inside function. Let me just write
that like this. Times the derivative with
respect to xthat's what we're doing of xy. And I'm going to leave it
like that for now because that's going to take a
little bit of space. And then that equals
the derivative of 2 with respect to x. Well 2 never changes, right? It's a constant, so
it's derivative is 0. Let's see if we can simplify
this a little bit, and we'll come back to that,
let's just write this. So we have 3g no I'm
confusing myself with my bad penmanship. 3y all that talk of g
got me confused dy/dx. 3y squared dy/dx minus y
squared minus I'm just distributing the minus
xy minus 2xy dy/dx minus sin of xy. And then this whole thing
times the derivative of xy with respect to x. Well we can just do the
product rule here. What's the derivative of
xy with respect to x? Well the derivative of x
is 1, so it's 1 times y. Derivative of the first
times the second function. Plus the derivative of
the second function with respect to x. So what's the derivative
of y with respect to x? Well it's just dy/dx, right? dy/dx times the first function. That's just the product rule. Review of the product rule if
that was a little confusing. It's equal to 0. And now we can
attempt to simplify. So let's see if I can do it. So we have 3y squared
dy/dx minus y squared minus 2xy dy/dx. Now this one's interesting,
so let me distribute the sin of xy. This is just a 1, so it's minus
y sin of xy minus x dy/dx sin of xy I'm just simplifying,
this is just algebra. So y is equal to 0. Now let's group all of the
terms that have a dy/dx in them and distribute out the dy/dx. So this is equal to dy/dx times
this 3y squared minus two xy. I'm just undistributing where
I'm dividing out the dy/dx. So let me actually
show you the terms. So this has a dy/dx,
this has a dy/dx. And this is just algebra. This has a dy/dx, so let
me separate those out. So it's 3y squared minus
2xy minus x sin of xy. Well that's all of the ones
with the dy/dx on them. And then these terms and I'm
just skipping a couple of steps because this is
algebra right now. The non dy/dx terms that
term, and I guess there's only two of them I'm just going
to add to the other side of equation. So I'm just going to bring
them over to the other side. Hopefully that step
doesn't confuse you. This is just algebraic
simplification at this point. I could have written minus y
squared minus y sin xy and then added them on the other side,
but I'm about to run out of space and time, so I'm just
going to add these to both sides of the equation. So that equals y squared
plus y sin of xy. I think I've covered
all of the terms. And now since our goal is to
find the derivative of y with respect to x, we can divide
both sides of this equation by this term right here, and our
final answer is let me do it in a good color. dy/dx. The derivative of y with
respect to x is equal to that y squared plus y sin of xy
divided by this 3y squared minus 2xy minus x sin of xy. And there you have it. That was a good implicit
differentiation problem and if you understood how to do that,
you understand how to do implicit differentiation. And I hope I didn't make any
careless mistakes, and it's a good exercise for you to try
to do it again on your own. See you soon. 

Transcript for: More implicit differentiation
I've been asked to do a few
more implicit differentiation problems, and this is something
that I think confuses a lot of people, so let's do a
couple more problems. And I think there was a typo. I forgot the user that actually
sent this, but I'm guessing this is what he intended. And if this isn't what he
intended, this is something close, so it should
give the idea. So the implicit function they
gave was x squared minus 24xy plus 16y squared minus 400x
minus 300y is equal to 0. So, how do we do this? Well, we take the derivative of
both sides with respect to x. I could write the derivative
operator on both sides, but I think you know that at this
point, so that's the next step. So let's do that, and
I'll do it in blue. OK, derivative of x square
with respect to x is 2x. And now, let's see, it's
going to be minus 24. I'm going to take the constant
term out, so minus 24 times the derivative of xy. So what's the derivative of xy? We could use the
product rule here. The derivative of the first
term x, well, that's just 1, right? So 1 is the derivative of x
times the second expression, or you could say the second
mini-function or whatever, times y, and then plus the
first expression x times the derivative of the
second expression. Well, what's the derivative
of y with respect to x? And this sometimes confuses
people because it's so easy. Well, it's just dy/dx. Instead of writing dy/dx, I'm
just going to write y prime here just to get you used to a
different type of notation, although I prefer dy/dx
because you realize you're using the chain rule. But anyway, xy prime, that's
dy/dx, plus so we'll do the chain rule again. So let's take the derivative of
this expression with respect to y first, so that's just 32y. But we're taking the derivative
with respect to x, so we have to take the derivative of this
with respect y, which we did, and then multiply that times
the derivative of y with respect to x, which is
just dy/dx, or y prime. And then this with respect to
x, well, that's just minus 400. And then what's the derivative
of this with respect to x? Well, it's minus 300, and then
times the derivative of y with respect to x because we're
doing the chain rule, right? Minus 300 is just the
derivative of this with respect y. And then I want
to hit this point. You know, some people when they
learn this, they just say, oh, whenever I take a derivative of
y, I just take the derivative and I multiply by y prime. And that's right. That's essentially
what you're doing. But I want you understand
that you're doing the chain rule when you do that. So you're taking the derivative
with respect to y and then multiplying that times the
derivative with respect to x, which we'll write as y prime
now, and all of that is equal to 0. Now let's simplify this. Let's see, I get 2x minus 24y
minus 24xy prime plus 32yy prime minus 400 minus 300y
prime is equal to 0. And let's switch colors. So let's separate all
the y prime terms out. So let's see, what are
the y prime terms? We have this term has a y prime
in it, we have this term has a y prime in it, and we have this
term has a y prime in it. So we can write these. Let's do the positive
ones first. So 32y, so this is the
same thing as y prime. y prime times 32y
minus 24x minus 300. Those are all the y prime
terms, and then we're left with just the regular terms. So then plus 2x minus 24y
minus 400 is equal to 0. I just rearranged it and
took out the y prime out of this, this and this term. Let's take all of these to the
other side of the equation. Now , essentially what I want
to do is get all the terms that don't have the y prime onto the
right-hand side and then divide by this, and then we will
solve the equation. Let's see, so we get y prime
times and this is you could also write, you know the
derivative with respect to x or dy/dx. In general, even though it
takes more time, I like to normally write dy/dx, because,
you remember, I'm taking the derivative with respect
to x. y prime? I don't know. You might be taking the
derivative with respect to who knows what? Let's see, 32y minus 24x minus
300 is equal to put all these on the right-hand side so you
get I'll switch the order. I like to put the
positive numbers first. 24y minus 2x plus 400, right? And then divide both sides by
this, and I'll do it in a different color because we're
almost at the answer, and we get y prime the derivative
with respect to x is equal to this thing 24y minus 2x plus
400, all of that over this thing: 32y minus 24x minus 300. And let's see, we could at
least it looks like well, everything's divisible by 2, so
we could divide the numerator and the denominator by 2, and
you get 12y minus x plus 200 over 16y minus 12x minus 150. And if I didn't make a careless
mistake, that's the answer. The derivative of y with
respect to x any time is this expression that has y's and x
in it, and that's cool because this is a fairly convoluted
implicit function, but we can figure out the slope of it at
any point because we know the derivative. Let's do the next one. And this one is this
one looks simpler. x minus y squared is equal
to 8 times y minus 6. All right. So let's just take the
derivative with respect to x of both sides, and I'll use the
dy/dx notation this time. So let's first use
the chain rule. Let's take the derivative
of the inside. So what's the derivative
of the inside function? Well, we could do
it either way. Let's do it the other way. I always do inside and out, but
let's take the derivative of this entire expression with
respect to x minus y. Well, that is 2
times x minus y. And then it's going to be that
times the derivative of x minus y with respect to x. So what the derivative of x
minus y with respect to x? Well, the derivative of x
with respect to x is just 1. And what's the derivative of
well, we could say minus y with respect to x. Well, it's just minus dy/dx. You could say the derivative of
y with respect to y is or the derivative of minus y with
respect to y is minus 1, and then by the chain rule,
multiply that times by the derivative of y
with respect to x. Either way, I think you
get the point, hopefully. So that's the derivative
of the left-hand side. And now what's the derivative
of the right-hand side? Well, we could do the chain
rule or whatever, but, you know, this is the same thing
as 8y minus 48, right? So we could rewrite
this is 8y minus 48. And so, if you take the
derivative of this with respect to x, the constant
doesn't contribute. So what's the derivative
of 8y with respect to x? Well, it's the derivative of 8y
with respect to y, which is just 8, and by the chain rule,
times the derivative of 8y with respect to y times
the derivative of y with respect to x. And now, we just
solve for dy/dx. Let's see, you get and I will
do a different color now. 2x minus 2y times 1 minus
dy/dx is equal to 8 dy/dx. And then what can we do? We can distribute this out. So 2x times this whole thing. So 2x minus 2x dy/dx, right? That times that, and then
that times that, and then this times this. So minus 2y and then minus
minus, or plus, 2y dy/dx. And then let's take this
because I want to put all the dy/dx terms on the same side,
so let's subtract this from both sides of the equation. So then we get minus 8
dy/dx is equal to 0. And then the next step, well,
let's just separate out all the dy/dx terms. So that's a dy/dx term,
that's one, that's one. They're easier to spot than
when you write y prime. So if we take those together
and take out the dy/dx, we get dy, the derivative of y with
respect to x, times let's see, are any of them positive? I'll put that one first. 2y minus 2x, right? That's this one. Minus 8 and then plus 2x
minus 2y is equal to 0. Let's put these onto
the right-hand side of the equation. We're almost there. dy/dx times 2y minus 2x minus 8
is equal to 2y minus 2x I just took those and put them on
the right-hand side and now divide both sides by
this, and we are done. dy/dx is equal to 2y minus
2x, all of that over 2y minus 2x minus 8. And once again we can divide
the numerator and the denominator by 2. So we're left with y minus
x over y minus x minus 8. And we're done. Hopefully, you found
that helpful. 

Transcript for: More chain rule and implicit differentiation intuition
Let's try to get a better
intuition of the chain rule, and in the process, we'll get
a better intuition of how it applies to implicit
differentiation or vice versa. So let's say and I'm going to
get out of the world of x's and y's and f of x's for a second,
just so that you see that those are just letters and there's
nothing special about them. And I think sometimes it
helps develop the intuition. So let's say that a is equal
to b squared and that b is equal to the sine of c. And my question to you is
what is the derivative of a with respect to c? We have a defined in terms of
b, so it's not like we can just take the derivative. I mean, how do we do that? Well, that's where the
chain rule comes in. And the chain rule just tells
us that the derivative of a with respect to c is equal to
the derivative of a with respect to b times
the derivative of b with respect to c. And you shouldn't really
you don't even have to memorize this. We're just multiplying two
fractions where the denominator in the first one is the same as
the numerator in the second one. So if you were to multiply
fractions, they would cancel out, right? Or if you were to actually
multiply these fractions out, you'd get da times
db on the numerator. In the denominator, you would
get da sorry, db times dc in the numerator, and then
these would cancel out, and then you're back
with da over dc. So there's nothing fancy,
really, about the chain rule when you actually view
them for what they are. They're fractions, but the
values in the numerator and the denominator, they are these
differentials, these infinitely small changes in
these variables. But anyway, the chain rule
tells us: change of a with respect to c is equal to the
change of a with respect to b times the change of
b with respect to c. And these are pretty easy
to calculate based on the information that
I've just given you. What is the change of
a with respect to b? The derivative of a
with respect to b? Well, that's pretty
straightforward, right? The derivative a with respect
to b is equal to 2b. So this is 2b. And what's the derivative
of b with respect to c? Derivative of b with
respect to c, well, that's equal to cosine of c. And so we're done. The derivative of a with
respect to c is equal to this, which is this, 2b, the
derivative of a with respect to b times the derivative
of b with respect to c. So times cosine of c. And then if you don't like it
in this format, if you don't like the derivative of a with
respect to c being dependent or being a function of both b and
c, you can just substitute for b because b is also
a function of c. So let's do that. So the derivative of a with
respect to c is equal to 2b. But what's b? b is just sine of c. So 2 just substitute sine of
c for b 2 sine of c, and then we have the remainder, right? This is this, and then
times cosine of c, and that's just that. And we're done. And I want to now try to make
the connection between this and the kind of I don't want to
say well, you know, kind of the plain English way I
talked about doing that chain rule before. So all of the chain rule
problems that I think I've done so far would have had a
explicitly defined in terms of c, but you're saying, oh, but
then, you know, I said outside and inside and et cetera. And we can do that. We can make a explicitly
defined in terms of c, and how do we do that? We could substitute before we
even take the derivative. So we can substitute this
for here, and we get what? a is equal to b squared,
b is sine of c, so it's sine of c squared. And now we could take the
derivative of a with respect to c using the chain rule. And this is the more
traditional way that I showed it, but maybe it gave
you more intuition. It probably gave you more
intuition of how to actually do the problem, but it probably
gave you less intuition of how it applies to the chain rule. So hopefully, this will
connect everything together. So the derivative of a with
respect to c is equal to I think sometimes I said that I
like to take the derivative of the inside and then multiply
that times the derivative of the outside, but we could
do it in either order. So let's take the
derivative of the outside. So what's the derivative
of the outside? sine of c squared, well,
it's 2 sine of c times the derivative of the inside. The derivative of the
inside is cosine of c. The phone is ringing. I'm not going to answer it. And so we ended up with the
exact same result, and it makes sense, because when I say the
derivative of the outside, when I take the derivative of sine c
squared and I get 2 sine of c, I'm really just taking the
derivative of a with respect to b, right? Because the derivative
of a with respect to b is 2b or 2 sine of c. And then when I take the
derivative of the inside, I'm really taking the derivative
of b with respect to c. So hopefully, that gives
you a little intuition. So now let's take that
intuition and tackle some implicit differentiation
problems. And if you think about it,
this kind of was an implicit differentiation problem. So let's say I want to take the
derivative with respect to x of y squared x to the third. And some of you all might know
how to mechanically do this. Well, I won't go into the
mechanics because the whole point of this
video is the intuition. And maybe you have the
intuition in which case you might not have to watch this
video, but let me give you the intuition. And I think the best way
to give the intuition is to actually do some
variable substitution. Let's define a is equal to y
squared and b is equal to x to the third, right? Then this is the same thing,
and I just made this stuff you know, this could
have been any letters. This is the same thing as
the derivative with respect to x of a times b, right? And what does the
chain rule tell us? Well, actually, we could just
do the product rule here, so let's do the product rule. So we're taking the derivative
with respect to x of a times b. So let's do that. This is just the product rule
so it's the derivative of a with respect to x times b plus
the derivative of b with respect to x times a. That's just the product rule. But what's the derivative of a
with respect to x and what's the derivative of b
with respect to x? So the derivative of a with
respect to x and this is where we get into
the chain rule. The derivative of a with
respect to x is equal to the derivative of a with respect to
y times the derivative of y with respect to x, right? This is just the chain rule. These dy in the denominator
and the numerator, they'll cancel out. So this is just the chain rule. And what is this? What's the derivative of
a with respect to y? Well, a is equal to y squared,
so that is equal to 2y times the derivative of y
with respect to x. Well, we haven't explicitly
defined y in terms of x, so we're just going to have
to leave it like that. So times dy/dx. So this, right here, the
derivative of a with respect to x, is just that. And what's the derivative
of b with respect to x? Well, here b is explicitly
defined in terms of x, so this is pretty straightforward. There's no chain rule
application here, so that is just going to be 3x squared. And so what's our final answer? The final answer is the
derivative with respect to x of y squared x to the third is
equal to derivative of a with respect to x, or you could view
that as the derivative of y squared with respect to x,
which is 2y dy/dx, right? You could say this is the
derivative of a with respect to x or the derivative of y
squared with respect to x, and this is just from the
chain rule, right? This was the chain rule. 2y times dy/dx and
then times b. Well, what's b? b is x to the
third plus the derivative of b with respect to x, well, that's
3x squared, times a. a is just y squared. So hopefully, that gave you the
intuition and made it a little bit clearer of why implicit
differentiation you're really just applying the chain rule. And then, you know, just the
way I've been doing in all the problems without going through
all of this mess just to show you that it isn't that hard of
a problem, that you could just do it straight up. You could just say, OK,
this is the product rule. It's the derivative of the
first expression times the second expression plus the
derivative of the second expression times the first. What's the derivative of this
first expression y squared? Well, it's the derivative of
that expression with respect to y times the derivative
of y with respect to x. And it's only because we're
taking the derivative with respect to x times the second
expression, x to the third, plus the derivative of the
second expression with respect to x, 3x squared, times the
first expression, y squared. Well, anyway, I'm
at my time limit. Hopefully, that helped a little
bit and didn't confuse things, and let me know if you want me
to do even more videos on this. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Trig Implicit Differentiation Example
I've been asked implicitly
differentiate the equation tangent of x over y is
equal to x plus y. And I've done several implicit
differentiation videos, but this tends to be one of the
biggest sources of pain for first year calculus students. So I thought I would give
at least another example. It never hurts to see
as many as possible. So let's do this one. So to implicitly differentiate
this, we just apply the derivative with respect to x
operator to both sides of the equation. The derivative with this
respect to x  the derivative of the left side with respect
to x is the same as the derivative of the right
side with respect to x. The right side's going to be
very straightforward, but the left side is a
little bit tricky. So let's do that on
the side over here. Let me write the left hand side
a little bit differently. I'm going to do it in
a different color. Let me say that a is equal
to the tangent of b. And let me say that b
is equal to x over y. Then a is clearly
the same thing. I mean if I just substituted
b back in here, a, this whole thing I could
re-write as just a. So if we're taking the
derivative of a with respect to x, that's what we
want to do right here. Let me just take the derivative
of both sides of this. This would be the derivative of
a with respect to x is equal to the derivative of x
with respect to x. Well that's pretty
straightforward, that's just 1. Plus the derivative of
y with respect to x. So let me write it like this. I'll write the derivative
operator, the derivative oh y with respect to x. That's all we did. We just applied the derivative
operator to y, and we don't know what this thing is,
we're going to solve for it. But obviously, I can't just
leave this here, the derivative of a with respect to x. We just solved for a, and
a is just this thing right here, right? a is tangent of b, and
b is just y over x. The reason why I wrote it this
way is because I wanted to show you that when you take the
derivative of this, it just comes out of the chain rule. It's not some type of new
voodoo magic that you haven't learned yet. So the derivative  let
me just write down the chain rule right here. The derivative of a with
respect to x is equal to the derivative of a with respect
to b times the derivative of b with respect to x. That's just the chain rule and
it's very easy to remember, because the db's cancel out and
you're just left with the derivative of a with respect to
x, if you just treated these like regular fractions. So what's the derivative
of a with respect to b? Well, that's just 1 over
cosine squared of b. And if you don't have that
memorized, it's actually not too hard to prove to yourself
if you just write this as sine of b over cosine of b, but this
tends to be one of the trig derivatives that most
people memorize. I think I've already made a
video where I proved this. And some books still write this
as secant squared of b, but we know that secant squared is the
same thing as 1 over cosine squared. I like to keep it in kind of
the fundamental trig functions, or trig ratios as opposed to
things like secant and cosecant. Then what's the derivative
of b with respect to x? So this is pretty interesting. Let me re-write b, actually. Let me write b is equal to
x times y to the minus 1. So the derivative of b with
respect to x, we could do a little bit of chain
rule right here. We could say  let me write
this  the derivative of b with respect to x is equal to
the derivative of x times y to the negative 1. So the derivative of x is 1. times y to the negative 1 plus
the derivative of y  so let me just write this. Plus the derivative with
respect to x of y to the minus 1 times the
first term, times x. So this thing right here, and
clearly I haven't completely simplified it yet. I still have to figure out
what this thing is here. But I just simply applied
the product rule here. Your derivative of the first
term, derivative of x is 1 times the second term plus
the derivative of the second term times the first term. That's all I did there. So the derivative of b
with respect to x is just this thing right there. So it equals  let me do it in
the yellow  so it's times  oh, I'll do it in the blue
since I already wrote it. This is the blue, derivative of
b with respect to x is y to the minus 1, or 1 over y plus the
derivative with respect to x of 1 over y times x. So let me write that down here. So we just figured out, or
we're almost done figuring out, what the derivative of a
with respect to x is, and we could throw that in there. But we're not done. What's the derivative of 1
over y with respect to x? Well, do the chain rule again. And I want to be very
clear with this. I know this might seem a little
bit cumbersome what I'm doing here, but I think it might
make a little bit of sense. Let me just set c is
equal to 1 over y. So the derivative of c with
respect to x, just from the chain rule, is equal to the
derivative of c with respect to y times the derivative
of y with respect to x. What's the derivative of
c with respect to y? Well this is the same thing
as  I could re-write this as y to the minus 1. So it's minus y to
the minus 2 power. That's what this thing is. This thing is that right there. And I don't know what the
derivative of y with respect to x is. That's what we're
trying to solve for. So it's that times
the derivative of y with respect to x. That just comes out
of the chain rule. So this thing right here, this
is the derivative of this thing with respect to x, which is the
same thing as derivative of c with respect to x. So I can write this little
piece right here, I can re-write this little piece as
minus y to the minus 2 dy dx, and then, of course,
that there is times x. And then we had the plus 1 over
y, and all of that was times the 1 over cosine squared of b. So now we've simplified
this a good bit. I hope going into the chain
rule didn't confuse you, because I really want to hit
the point home that all of these implicit differentiation
problems, these dy dx's just don't, it's not some rule
that you should memorize. They come out naturally
from the chain rule. So we solved da dx,
that is equal to this expression right here. Let me write it, it's equal to
1 over cosine squared of b. Well what's b? I wrote it's cos x over y. Cosine squared of x over y
times all of this stuff over here, times all of this mess. 1 over y plus, or maybe I
should say minus, minus  if I just simplify this, this is x
over y squared times dy dx. Then that is equal to
the right hand side. It is equal to 1 plus dy dx. And now all we have to
do is solve for dy dx. So let me just review
how we got here. I went through the chain rule
at every step of the way, but once you get the hang of it,
you can literally just go straight down this way. The way you think about
it is  the right hand side I think you get it. The derivative of x is 1, the
derivative of y with respect to x, well that's just dy dx. But the left hand side, you
take the derivative of the whole thing with
respect to x over y. So that's just the derivative
of tangent is 1 over cosine squared. So it's 1 over cosine squared
of x over y, and you multiply that times the derivative of
x over y with respect to x. And the derivative of x over
y with respect to x is the derivative of and it gets
complicated, that's why it's good to do it on the side here
 but it's the derivative of x, which is 1 times 1 over y. Which is that term plus the
derivative of 1 over Y with respect to X, which is minus
1 over y squared dy dx, from the chain rule, times dx. That's why it was good to do
over to the side so we don't make a careless mistake. But once you get used to it you
could actually do that in your head, and of course, that
equals the right hand side. So from here on out it's
just pure algebra. Just to solve for our dy dx. So a good place to start is to
multiply both sides of this equation times cosine
squared of x over y. So obviously, that'll
turn to 1 on this side. And the left hand side will be
1 over y minus x over y squared dy dx is equal to  I have to
multiply both side of the equation times this denominator
right here  is equal to cosine squared of x over y plus
cosine squared of x over y dy dx. Now what can we do. We can subtract this cosine
squared of x over y from both sides of the equation, and we
get 1 over y minus cosine squared of x over y. All I did is I subtracted
this from both sides of the equation, so essentially I
moved it over to the left hand side. What I'm trying to do is I'm
going to try to separate the non dy dx terms from
the dy dx terms. So I want to bring this
dy dx term over to the right hand side. So let me add x over y
squared dy dx to both sides. So then that is equal to x over
y  let me write that in the color that I originally wrote
it in, a slightly different color. So that is x over y squared 
I'll write the dy dx in orange. dy dx, and then you have this
term, plus cosine squared of x over y dy dx. I think we're in
the home stretch. Let's factor this dy dx out
from the right hand side. So this is equal to dy dx
times x over y squared plus cosine squared of x over y. And that is equal to this thing
over here, it's equal to 1 over y minus cosine
squared of x over y. Now to solve for dy dx, we just
have to divide both sides of this equation by this
expression right here. And then what do we get? We get, if we just divide both
sides by that, we get 1 over y minus cosine squared of x over
y divided by this whole business right there. x over y squared plus cosine
squared of x over y is equal to our dy dx. And then we're done. We just applied the chain rule
multiple times and we were able to implicitly differentiate
tangent of y over x is equal to x plus y. The hard part really is getting
to this step right here. After this step it's literally
just pure algebra just to solve for the dy dx's, and then you
get that answer right there. Anyway, hopefully you
found that useful. 

Transcript for: Derivative of x^(x^x) | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
A bit of a classic implicit
differentiation problem is the problem y is
equal to x to the x. And then to find out what
the derivative of y is with respect to x. And people look at that, oh you
know, I don't have just a constant exponent here, so I
can't just use the power rules, how do you do it. And the trick here is really
just to take the natural log of both sides of this equation. And this is going to build
up to what we're going to do later in this video. So If you take the natural log
on both sides of this equation, you get the natural log of y is
equal to the natural log of x to the x. Now our power rules, or I guess
our natural log rules, say look, if I'm taking the natural
log of something to the something, this is equivalent
to, I can rewrite the natural log of x to the x as being
equal to x times the natural log of x. So let me rewrite
everything again. If I take the natural log of
both sides of that equation, I get the natural log of y is
equal to x times the natural log of x. And now we can take the
derivative of both sides of this with respect to x. So the derivative with respect
to x of that, and then the derivative with
respect to x of that. Now we're going to apply a
little bit of the chain rule. So the chain rule. What's the derivative of
this with respect to x? What's the derivative of
our inner expression with respect to x? It's a little implicit
differentiation, so it's dy with respect to x times the
derivative of this whole thing with respect to
this inner function. So the derivative of
natural log of x is 1/x. So the derivative of
natural log of y with respect to y is 1/y. So times 1/y. And the derivative of this
this is just the product rule, and I'll arbitrarily switch
colors here is the derivative of the first term, which is 1,
times the second term, so times the natural log of x plus the
derivative of the second term, which is 1/x times
the first term. So times x. And so we get dy/dx times 1/y
is equal to natural log of x plus this just turns out to
be 1 x divided by x, and then you multiply both
sides of this by y. You get dy/dx is equal
to y times the natural log of x plus 1. And if you don't like this y
sitting here, you could just make the substitution. y is equal to x to the x. So you could say that the
derivative of y with respect to x is equal to x to the x times
the natural log of x plus 1. And that's a fun problem, and
this is often kind of given as a trick problem, or sometimes
even a bonus problem if people don't know to take the natural
log of both sides of that. But I was given an even more
difficult problem, and that's what we're going
to tackle in this. But it's good to see this
problem done first because it gives us the basic tools. So the more difficult
problem we're going to deal with is this one. Let me write it down. So the problem is y is equal
to x to the and here's the twist x to the x to the x. And we want to find out dy/dx. We want to find out
the derivative of y with respect to x. So to solve this problem we
essentially use the same tools. We use the natural log to
essentially breakdown this exponent and get it into
terms that we can deal with. So we can use the product rule. So let's take the natural log
of both sides of this equation like we did last time. You get the natural log of y
is equal to the natural log of x to the x to the x. And this is just the
exponent on this. So we can rewrite this as x to
the x times the natural log times the natural log of x. So now our expression our
equation is simplified to the natural log of y is equal to x
to the x times the natural log of x. But we still have this
nasty x to the x here. We know no easy way to take the
derivative there, although I've actually just shown you what
the derivative of this is, so we could actually just
apply it right now. I was going to take the natural
log again and it would turn into this big, messy, confusing
thing but I realized that earlier in this video I
just solved for what the derivative of x to the x is. It's this thing right here. It's this crazy
expression right here. So we just have to remember
that and then apply and then do our problem. So let's do our problem. And if we hadn't solved this
ahead of time, it was kind of an unexpected benefit of doing
the simpler version of the problem, you could just keep
taking the natural log of this, but it'll just get a
little bit messier. But since we already know what
the derivative of x to the x is, let's just apply it. So we're going to take
the derivative of both sides of the equation. Derivative of this is equal
to the derivative of this. We'll ignore this for now. Derivative of this with respect
to x is the derivative of the natural log of y
with respect to y. So that's 1/y times
the derivative of y with respect to x. That's just the chain rule. We learned that in
implicit differentiation. And so this is equal to the
derivative of the first term times the second term, and I'm
going to write it out here just because I don't want to skip
steps and confuse people. So this is equal to the
derivative with respect to x of x to the x times the natural
log of x plus the derivative with respect to x of
the natural log of x times x to the x. So let's focus on the right
hand side of this equation. What is the derivative of x
to the x with respect to x? Well we just solved that
problem right here. It's x to the x natural
log of x plus 1. So this piece right there
I already forgot what it was it was x to the x
natural log of x plus 1. That is x to the x times the
natural log of x plus 1. And then we're going to
multiply that times the natural log of x. And then we're going to add
that to, plus the derivative of the natural log of x. That's fairly straightforward,
that's 1/x times x to the x. And of course the left
hand side of the equation was just 1/y dy/dx. And we can multiply both sides
of this now by y, and we get dy/dx is equal to y times all
of this crazy stuff x to the x times the natural log of x
plus 1 times the natural log of x plus 1/x times x to the x. That's x to the negative 1. We could rewrite this as x
to the minus 1, and then you add the exponents. You could write this as x
to the x minus 1 power. And if we don't like this
y here, we can just substitute it back. y was equal to this, this
crazy thing right there. So our final answer for this
seemingly well on one level looks like a very simple
problem, but on another level when you appreciate what it's
saying, it's like oh there's a very complicated problem you
get the derivative of y with respect to x is equal
to y, which is this. So that's x to the x to the x
times all of this stuff times x to the x natural log of x
plus 1 times the natural log of x, and then all of that
plus x to the x minus 1. So who would have thought. Sometimes math is elegant. You take the derivative of
something like this and you get something neat. For example, when you take
the derivative of natural log of x you get 1/x. That's very simple and elegant,
and it's nice that math worked out that way. But sometimes you do something,
you take an operation on something that looks pretty
simple and elegant, and you get something that's hairy and not
that pleasant to look at, but is a pretty
interesting problem. And there you go. 

Transcript for: Introduction to l'Hpital's rule | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Most of what we do early on
when we first learn about calculus is to use limits. We use limits to figure out
derivatives of functions. In fact, the definition
of a derivative uses the notion of a limit. It's a slope around the point
as we take the limit of points closer and closer
to the point in question. And you've seen that many,
many, many times over. In this video I guess we're
going to do it in the opposite direction. We're going to use derivatives
to figure out limits. And in particular, limits that
end up in indeterminate form. And when I say by indeterminate
form I mean that when we just take the limit as it is, we end
up with something like 0/0, or infinity over infinity, or
negative infinity over infinity, or maybe negative
infinity over negative infinity, or positive infinity
over negative infinity. All of these are indeterminate,
undefined forms. And to do that we're going
to use l'Hopital's rule. And in this video I'm just
going to show you what l'Hoptial's rule says and how
to apply it because it's fairly straightforward, and it's
actually a very useful tool sometimes if you're in some
type of a math competition and they ask you to find a
difficult limit that when you just plug the numbers in you
get something like this. L'Hopital's rule is normally
what they are testing you for. And in a future video I might
prove it, but that gets a little bit more involved. The application is actually
reasonably straightforward. So what l'Hopital's rule tells
us that if we have and I'll do it in abstract form first,
but I think when I show you the example it will
all be made clear. That if the limit as x approaches
c of f of x is equal to 0, and the limit as x approaches c of
g of x is equal to 0, and and this is another and and the
limit as x approaches c of f prime of x over g prime of
x exists and it equals L. then so all of these
conditions have to be met. This is the indeterminate
form of 0/0, so this is the first case. Then we can say that the
limit as x approaches c of f of x over g of x is also
going to be equal to L. So this might seem a little bit
bizarre to you right now, and I'm actually going to write the
other case, and then I'll do an example. We'll do multiple examples
and the examples are going to make it all clear. So this is the first case and
the example we're going to do is actually going to be
an example of this case. Now the other case is if the
limit as x approaches c of f of x is equal to positive or
negative infinity, and the limit as x approaches c of g of
x is equal to positive or negative infinity, and the
limit of I guess you could say the quotient of the derivatives
exists, and the limit as x approaches c of f prime of x
over g prime of x is equal to L. Then we can make this
same statement again. Let me just copy that out. Edit, copy, and then
let me paste it. So in either of these two
situations just to kind of make sure you understand what you're
looking at, this is the situation where if you just
tried to evaluate this limit right here you're going to
get f of c, which is 0. Or the limit as x approaches c
of f of x over the limit as x approaches c of g of x. That's going to give you 0/0. And so you say, hey, I don't
know what that limit is? But this says, well, look. If this limit exists, I could
take the derivative of each of these functions and then
try to evaluate that limit. And if I get a number, if that
exists, then they're going to be the same limit. This is a situation where when
we take the limit we get infinity over infinity, or
negative infinity or positive infinity over positive
or negative infinity. So these are the two
indeterminate forms. And to make it all clear let
me just show you an example because I think this will make
things a lot more clear. So let's say we are trying
to find the limit I'll do this in a new color. Let me do it in this
purplish color. Let's say we wanted to find
the limit as x approaches 0 of sine of x over x. Now if we just view this, if we
just try to evaluate it at 0 or take the limit as we approach 0
in each of these functions, we're going to get something
that looks like 0/0. Sine of 0 is 0. Or the limit as x approaches
0 of sine of x is 0. And obviously, as x approaches
0 of x, that's also going to be 0. So this is our
indeterminate form. And if you want to think about
it, this is our f of x, that f of x right there
is the sine of x. And our g of x, this g of
x right there for this first case, is the x. g of x is equal to x and f
of x is equal to sine of x. And notice, well, we definitely
know that this meets the first two constraints. The limit as x, and in
this case, c is 0. The limit as x approaches 0 of
sine of sine of x is 0, and the limit as x approaches
0 of x is also equal to 0. So we get our
indeterminate form. So let's see, at least, whether
this limit even exists. If we take the derivative of f
of x and we put that over the derivative of g of x, and take
the limit as x approaches 0 in this case, that's our c. Let's see if this limit exists. So I'll do that in the blue. So let me write the derivatives
of the two functions. So f prime of x. If f of x is sine of x,
what's f prime of x? Well, it's just cosine of x. You've learned that many times. And if g of x is x,
what is g prime of x? That's super easy. The derivative of x is just 1. Let's try to take the limit as
x approaches 0 of f prime of x over g prime of x over
their derivatives. So that's going to be the
limit as x approaches 0 of cosine of x over 1. I wrote that 1 a
little strange. And this is pretty
straightforward. What is this going to be? Well, as x approaches 0
of cosine of x, that's going to be equal to 1. And obviously, the limit as
x approaches 0 of 1, that's also going to be equal to 1. So in this situation we just
saw that the limit as x approaches our c
in this case is 0. As x approaches 0 of f
prime of x over g prime of x is equal to 1. This limit exists and it
equals 1, so we've met all of the conditions. This is the case
we're dealing with. Limit as x approaches 0 of
sine of x is equal to 0. Limit as z approaches 0
of x is also equal to 0. The limit of the derivative of
sine of x over the derivative of x, which is cosine of x over
1 we found this to be equal to 1. All of these top conditions
are met, so then we know this must be the case. That the limit as x approaches
0 of sine of x over x must be equal to 1. It must be the same limit as
this value right here where we take the derivative of the
f of x and of the g of x. I'll do more examples in the
next few videos and I think it'll make it a lot
more concrete. 

Transcript for: L'Hpital's rule example 1 | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say we need to evaluate
the limit as x approaches 0 of 2 sine of x minus sine of 2x,
all of that over x minus sine of x. Now, the first thing that I
always try to do when I first see a limit problem is hey,
what happens if I just try to evaluate this function
at x is equal to 0? Maybe nothing crazy happens. So let's just try it out. If we try to do x equals
0, what happens? We get 2 sine of 0, which is 0. Minus sine of 2 times 0. Well, that's going to be sine
of 0 again, which is 0. So our numerator is
going to be equal to 0. Sine of 0, that's 0. And then we have another
sine of 0 there. That's another 0, so all 0's. And our denominator,
we're going to have a 0 minus sine of 0. Well that's also going to be 0. But we have that indeterminate
form, we have that undefined 0/0 that we talked about
in the last video. So maybe we can use
L'Hopital's rule here. In order to use L'Hopital's
rule then the limit as x approaches 0 of the derivative
of this function over the derivative of this
function needs to exist. So let's just apply L'Hopital's
rule and let's just take the derivative of each of these and
see if we can find the limit. If we can, then that's going to
be the limit of this thing. So this thing, assuming that it
exists, is going to be equal to the limit as x approaches 0 of
the derivative of this numerator up here. And so what's the derivative
of the numerator going to be? I'll do it in a new color. I'll do it in green. Well, the derivative of 2
sine of x is 2 cosine of x. And then, minus well,
the derivative of sine of 2x is 2 cosine of 2x. So minus 2 cosine of 2x. Just use the chain rule
there, derivative of the inside is just 2. That's the 2 out there. Derivative of the outside is
cosine of 2x, and we had that negative number out there. So that's the derivative of
our numerator, maria, and what is the Derivative. of our denominator? Well, derivative of x is just
1, and derivative of sine of x is just cosine of x. So 1 minus cosine of x. So let's try to
evaluate this limit. What do we get? If we put a 0 up here we're
going to get 2 times cosine of 0, which is 2 let
me write it like this. So this is 2 times cosine
of 0, which is 1. So it's 2 minus 2
cosine of 2 times 0. Let me write it this way. Actually, let me just
do it this way. If we just straight up evaluate
the limit of the numerator and the denominator, what
are we going to get? We get 2 cosine of
0, which is 2. Minus 2 times cosine of
well, this 2 times 0 is still going to be 0. So minus 2 times cosine
of 0, which is 2. All of that over 1 minus the
cosine of 0, which is 1. So once again, we get 0/0. So does this mean that
the limit doesn't exist? No, it still might exist,
we might just want to do L'Hopital's rule again. Let me take the derivative
of that and put it over the derivative of that. And then take the limit and
maybe L'Hopital's rule will help us on the
next [INAUDIBLE]. So let's see if it
gets us anywhere. So this should be equal to
the limit if L'Hopital's rule applies here. We're not 100% sure yet. This should be equal to the
limit as x approaches 0 of the derivative of that thing over
the derivative of that thing. So what's the derivative
of 2 cosine of x? Well, derivative of cosine
of x is negative sine of x. So it's negative 2 sine of x. And then derivative of cosine
of 2x is negative 2 sine of 2x. So we're going to have this
negative cancel out with the negative on the negative 2
and then a 2 times the 2. So it's going to be
plus 4 sine of 2x. Let me make sure I
did that right. We have the minus 2 or the
negative 2 on the outside. Derivative of cosine of 2x
is going to be 2 times negative sine of x. So the 2 times 2 is 4. The negative sine of x
times the negative right there's a plus. You have a positive sine,
so it's the sine of 2x. That's the numerator when
you take the derivative. And the denominator this
is just an exercise in taking derivatives. What's the derivative
of the denominator? Derivative of 1 is 0. And derivative negative
cosine of x is just well, that's just sine of x. So let's take this limit. So this is going to be equal
to well, immediately if I take x is equal to 0 in the
denominator, I know that sine of 0 is just 0. Let's see what happens
in the numerator. Negative 2 times sine of 0. That's going to be 0. And then plus 4 times
sine of 2 times 0. Well, that's still sine of 0,
so that's still going to be 0. So once again, we got
indeterminate form again. Are we done? Do we give up? Do we say that L'Hopital's
rule didn't work? No, because this could have
been our first limit problem. And if this is our first limit
problem we say, hey, maybe we could use L'Hopital's rule
here because we got an indeterminate form. Both the numerator and
the denominator approach 0 as x approaches 0. So let's take the
derivatives again. This will be equal to
if the limit exist, the limit as x approaches 0. Let's take the derivative
of the numerator. The derivative of negative
2 sine of x is negative 2 cosine of x. And then, plus the
derivative of 4 sine of 2x. Well, it's 2 times
4, which is 8. Times cosine of 2x. Derivative of sine of
2x is 2 cosine of 2x. And that first 2 gets
multiplied by the 4 to get the 8. And then the derivative of the
denominator, derivative of sine of x is just cosine of x. So let's evaluate
this character. So it looks like we've made
some headway or maybe L'Hopital's rule stop applying
here because we take the limit as x approaches 0
of cosine of x. That is 1. So we're definitely not going
to get that indeterminate form, that 0/0 on this iteration. Let's see what happens
to the numerator. We get negative 2
times cosine of 0. Well that's just negative 2
because cosine of 0 is 1. Plus 8 times cosine of 2x. Well, if x is 0, so it's going
to be cosine of 0, which is 1. So it's just going to be an 8. So negative 2 plus 8. Well this thing right here,
negative 2 plus 8 is 6. 6 over 1. This whole thing is equal to 6. So L'Hopital's rule it
applies to this last step. If this was the problem we were
given and we said, hey, when we tried to apply the limit we get
the limit as this numerator approaches 0 is 0. Limit as this denominator
approaches 0 is 0. As the derivative of the
numerator over the derivative of the denominator, that
exists and it equals 6. So this limit must
be equal to 6. Well if this limit is equal to
6, by the same argument, this limit is also going
to be equal to 6. And by the same argument,
this limit has got to also be equal to 6. And we're done. 

Transcript for: L'Hpital's rule example 2 | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
We need to evaluate the limit,
as x approaches infinity, of 4x squared minus 5x, all of that
over 1 minus 3x squared. So infinity is kind
of a strange number. You can't just plug in infinity
and see what happens. But if you wanted to evaluate
this limit, what you might try to do is just evaluate if you
want to find the limit as this numerator approaches infinity,
you put in really large numbers there, and you're going to see
that it approaches infinity. That the numerator
approaches infinity as x approaches infinity. And if you put really large
numbers in the denominator, you're going to see
that that also well, not quite infinity. 3x squared will approach
infinity, but we're subtracting it. If you subtract infinity from
some non-infinite number, it's going to be negative infinity. So if you were to just kind
of evaluate it at infinity, the numerator, you would
get positive infinity. The denominator, you would
get negative infinity. So I'll write it like this. Negative infinity. And that's one of the
indeterminate forms that L'Hopital's Rule
can be applied to. And you're probably saying,
hey, Sal, why are we even using L'Hopital's Rule? I know how to do this
without L'Hopital's Rule. And you probably
do, or you should. And we'll do that in a second. But I just wanted to show you
that L'Hopital's Rule also works for this type of problem,
and I really just wanted to show you an example that had a
infinity over negative or positive infinity
indeterminate form. But let's apply
L'Hopital's Rule here. So if this limit exists, or if
the limit of their derivatives exist, then this limit's going
to be equal to the limit as x approaches infinity of the
derivative of the numerator. So the derivative of the
numerator is the derivative of 4x squared is 8x minus 5
over the derivative of the denominator is, well,
derivative of 1 is 0. Derivative of negative 3x
squared is negative 6x. And once again, when you
evaluated infinity, the numerator is going to
approach infinity. And the denominator is
approaching negative infinity. Negative 6 times infinity
is negative infinity. So this is negative infinity. So let's apply
L'Hopital's Rule again. So if the limit of these guys'
derivatives exist or the rational function of the
derivative of this guy divided by the derivative of that guy
if that exists, then this limit's going to be equal to
the limit as x approaches infinity of arbitrarily
switch colors derivative of 8x minus 5 is just 8. Derivative of negative
6x is negative 6. And this is just going to be
this is just a constant here. So it doesn't matter what limit
you're approaching, this is just going to equal this value. Which is what? If we put it in lowest
common form, or simplified form, it's negative 4/3. So this limit exists. This was an indeterminate form. And the limit of this
function's derivative over this function's derivative exists,
so this limit must also equal negative 4/3. And by that same argument,
that limit also must be equal to negative 4/3. And for those of you who
say, hey, we already knew how to do this. We could just factor
out an x squared. You are absolutely right. And I'll show you
that right here. Just to show you that it's
not the only you know, L'Hopital's Rule is not
the only game in town. And frankly, for this type of
problem, my first reaction probably wouldn't have been to
use L'Hopital's Rule first. You could have said that that
first limit so the limit as x approaches infinity of 4x
squared minus 5x over 1 minus 3x squared is equal to the
limit as x approaches infinity. Let me draw a little line here,
to show you that this is equal to that, not to this
thing over here. This is equal to the limit
as x approaches infinity. Let's factor out an x squared
out of the numerator and the denominator. So you have an x squared
times 4 minus 5 over x. Right? x squared times 5
over x is going to be 5x. Divided by let's factor out
an x out of the numerator. So x squared times 1
over x squared minus 3. And then these x
squareds cancel out. So this is going to be equal
to the limit as x approaches infinity of 4 minus 5 over x
over 1 over x squared minus 3. And what's this going
to be equal to? Well, as x approaches
infinity 5 divided by infinity this term
is going to be 0. Super duper infinitely
large denominator, this is going to be 0. That is going to approach 0. And same argument. This right here is
going to approach 0. All you're left with is
a 4 and a negative 3. So this is going to be
equal to negative 4 over a negative 3, or negative 4/3. So you didn't have to do
use L'Hopital's Rule for this problem. 

Transcript for: L'Hpital's rule example 3 | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
We want to figure out the limit
as x approaches 1 of the expression x over x minus
1 minus 1 over the natural log of x. So let's just see what
happens when we just try to plug in the 1. What happens if we evaluate
this expression at 1? Well then, we're going to get
a one here, over 1 minus 1. So we're going to get something
like a 1 over a 0, minus 1 over, and what's the
natural log of 1? e to the what power
is equal to one? Well, anything to the zeroth
power is equal to 1, so e to the zeroth power is going to
be equal to 1, so the natural log of 1 is going to be 0. So we get the strange,
undefined 1 over 0 minus 1 over 0. It's this bizarre-looking
undefined form. But it's not the indeterminate
type of form that we looked for in l'Hopital's rule. We're not getting a 0 over
a 0, we're not getting an infinity over an infinity. So you might just say, hey,
OK, this is a non-l'Hopital's rule problem. We're going to have to figure
out this limit some other way. And I would say, well
don't give up just yet! Maybe we can manipulate this
algebraically somehow so that it will give us the l'Hopital
indeterminate form, and then we can just apply the rule. And to do that, let's just
see, what happens if we add these two expressions? So if we add them, so this
expression, if we add it, it will be, well, the common
denominator is going to be x minus 1 times the
natural log of x. I just multiplied
the denominators. And then the numerator is going
to be, well, if I multiply essentially this whole term by
natural log of x, so it's going to be x natural log of x, and
then this whole term I'm going to multiply by x minus one. So minus x minus 1. And you could break it apart
and see that this expression and this expression
are the same thing. This right here, that right
there, is the same thing as x over x minus 1, because the
natural log of x's cancel out. Let me get rid of that. And then this right here is the
same thing as 1 over natural log of x, because the x
minus 1's cancel out. So hopefully you realize,
all I did is I added these two expressions. So given that, let's see what
happens if I take the limit as x approaches 1 of this thing. Because these are
the same thing. Do we get anything
more interesting? So what do we have here? We have one times the
natural log of 1. The natural log of 1 is 0, so
we have 0 here, so that is a 0. Minus 1 minus 0, so that's
going to be another 0, minus 0. So we get a 0 in the numerator. And in the denominator we get a
1 minus 1, which is 0, times the natural log of 1, which is
0, so 0 times 0, that is 0. And there you have it. We have indeterminate form that
we need for l'Hopital's rule, assuming that if we take the
derivative of that, and put it over the derivative of that,
that that limit exists. So let's try to do it. So this is going to be equal
to, if the limit exists, this is going to be equal to the
limit as x approaches 1. And let's take the derivative
in magenta, I'll take the derivative of this
numerator right over here. And for this first term,
just do the product rule. Derivative of x is one, and
then so 1 times the natural log of x, the derivative of the
first term times the second term. And then we're going to have
plus the derivative of the second term plus 1 over
x times the first term. It's just the product rule. So 1 over x times x, we're
going to see, that's just 1, and then we have minus the
derivative of x minus 1. Well, the derivative of x minus
1 is just 1, so it's just going to be minus 1. And then, all of that is over
the derivative of this thing. So let's take the derivative
of that, over here. So the derivative of the first
term, of x minus 1, is just 1. Multiply that times the second
term, you get natural log of x. And then plus the derivative of
the second term, derivative of natural log of x is one
over x, times x minus 1. I think we can simplify
this a little bit. This 1 over x times
x, that's a 1. We're going to
subtract one from it. So these cancel
out, right there. And so this whole expression
can be rewritten as the limit as approaches 1, the numerator
is just natural log of x, do that in magenta, and the
denominator is the natural log of x plus x minus 1 over x So let's try to evaluate
this limit here. So if we take x approaches one
of natural log of x, that will give us a, well,
natural log of 1 is 0. And over here, we get natural
log of 1, which is 0. And then plus 1 minus 1 over
plus 1 minus 1 over 1, well, that's just going
to be another 0. 1 minus 1 is zero. So you're going to
have 0 plus 0. So you're going to get
a 0 over 0 again. 0 over 0. So once again, let's apply
l'Hopital's rule again. Let's take the derivative
of that, put it over the derivative of that. So this, if we're ever going to
get to a limit, is going to be equal to the limit as x
approaches 1 of the derivative of the numerator, 1 over x,
right, the derivative of ln of x is 1/x, over the derivative
of the denominator. And what's that? Well, derivative of natural
log of x is 1 over x plus derivative of x minus 1 over x. You could view it this way,
as 1 over x times x minus 1. Well, derivative of x to the
negative 1, we'll take the derivative of the first one
times the second thing, and then the derivative of the
second thing times the first thing. So the derivative of the first
term, x to the negative 1, is negative x to the negative 2
times the second term, times x minus 1, plus the derivative of
the second term, which is just 1 times the first
term, plus 1 over x. So this is going to be equal
to, I just had a random thing pop up on my computer. Sorry for that little
sound, if you heard it. But where was I? Oh, let's just simplify
this over here. We were doing our
l'Hopital's rule. So this is going to be equal
to, let me, this is going to be equal to, if we evaluate x as
equal to 1, the numerator is just 1/1, which is just 1. So we're definitely not going
to have an indeterminate or at least a 0/0 form anymore. And the denominator is going to
be, if you evaluate it at 1, this is 1/1, which is 1, plus
negative 1 to the negative 2. So, or you say, 1 to the
negative 2 is just 1, it's just a negative one. But then you multiply that
times 1 minus 1, which is 0, so this whole term's
going to cancel out. And you have a plus
another 1 over 1. So plus 1 And so this is
going to be equal to 1/2. And there you have it. Using L'Hopital's rule and a
couple of steps, we solved something that at least
initially didn't look like it was 0/0. We just added the 2 terms, got
0/0, took derivatives of the numerators and the denominators
2 times in a row to eventually get our limit. 

Transcript for: Maxima Minima Slope Intuition
Well, I've been requested to do
some videos on concativity and maxima and minimum points and
inflection points, and all the like that you normally see in
your first semester of a calculus course. So, I thought I would
start doing them. But before we kind of go into
the actual problems that you might see in your book, I just
want to give you a broad intuition. Because in calculus class,
people there are all these rules, when, you know, the
second derivative is positive, you're concave this way. When the second derivative
is negative, you're concave this way. And people memorize the rules,
and they take the tests, and if they memorize it correctly
they do well on the tests. And then they forget it. Maybe they memorize it again by
the time of the final exam. But by the time they are
30 years old, they will have forgotten it. And that, frankly, is useless. Unless your whole goal
is just to pass exams. So I want to give
you some intuition. And hopefully, you will never
forget this intuition. So when you're first learning
calculus there's much more to functions than what I'm
going to do in this video. But there's kind of 3 types of
interesting points on most of the curves we'll talk about. So let's say, let
me draw a curve. Let's say the curve looks
something like this. You know, if this is the
x-axis that's too thick that's the y-axis. The curve could look
something like this. I don't know. Let me see. It could look like this. And so on. And if you have a curve like
this and you'll see all sorts of curves when you do your
calculus, because you have multiple degree polynomials, et
cetera what are the interesting points? Well, the interesting
points tend to be when the slope is equal to 0. So, in this, where does
the slope equal 0? What are the interesting
points here? Let me make sure I'm
using the right tool. Right there the
slope is 0, right? Because if you were to take the
tangent right there, it would look something like that. Right there the slope is 0, as
well, because if you took the tangent it would look
something like that. And then right there, as
well, the slope is 0. And the line, it really
isn't a tangent. It crosses the graph. But as we could see, the graph
kind of flattens out there. So these are the three points
that you tend to deal with in your first semester calculus
class when you're graphing and looking for extrema. And this is called a maximum. And in this case,
it's a local maxima. If, you know, if this was the
highest point for the entire function, it would be
a global maximum. This is a local minima. And if it was, you know, if it
was the lowest point of the entire graph which is the way
I drew it maybe this graph keeps going up like that, and
keeps going up like this. So this would be the
global minimum point. And then this is called an
inflection point, because it's neither a maximum, minimum, but
you kind of see that the graph kind of inflects. So let's study them a little
bit more and see if we can get a little intuition on what
happens to the graph, the first derivative, and the second
derivative, at each of these points. Let's start with a maximum
point, because maybe that's well, let's start with a
minimum point, because that's what we see the most. You know, when we used to study
y equals x squared, or regular parabolas, that was the
most common thing we saw. And then of course, if we have
a negative of a parabola, it becomes like that. But anyway, let's study a
minimum point where the graph is concave upward. Let's say we have a
point like this. So that's the graph
of the function. I don't know what that
is, that's f of x. So what is happening to
the slope as we go from roughly from here to there? Well, let's try a few points
and see if we can, by drawing the tangent lines, we get
intuition for the slope. So let's see, if I pick this
point, just randomly, the slope looks something like that. I'm trying to do a tangent. If I take this point I'm just
moving to the right a little bit, I'm just increasing my
x value the slope will look something like that. So it's negative here, but
if you look here, the slope is less negative. The slope is less
negative there. And if we go to the
minimum point there, the slope flattens out. And so, of course, the
derivative there would be 0. And then as we pass that
point, what happens? Well, here, the slope is
increasing a little bit more. Now the slope is
actually positive. So the slope was negative, less
negative, 0, a little positive. And then when you go here,
it goes more positive. So let's see if we
can graph that. Just to get an intuition. Obviously I haven't written any
numbers down, so we don't know what the exact value
of the slope is. So what does the
slope look like? So here it's really negative. So the slope is going to be
something really negative here. I'm just picking
a random point. And then, at this point right
here, it was less negative. So the slope is going
to be less negative. And then here, roughly
here, the slope is at 0. Right? The slope was 0. And then the slope gets a
little bit more positive. And then over there, it gets
a little bit more positive. So the slope, if we were to
actually graph the derivative of the function at that point,
it would be an upward sloping. And so I'm assuming this is
a second degree polynomial. If this was third degree, then
this would actually be a curve. So the slope will actually
look something like this. And does that make sense? Well, sure. The graph of this could be
y is equal to, I don't know, ax squared plus b. And then the derivative, or,
you know, f of x is equal to ax squared plus b. And so the derivative of
that, of course, would be what is that? 2ax plus 0. So this would just be a line. And it actually
goes through 0, 0. But it didn't have to. But hopefully that gives
you a little intuition. But now let's move to
the second derivative. So the slope of the slope. Let me draw it down here. The second derivative. My wife is coming home, so I
have to finish these videos before she gets here, otherwise
I have to continue it tomorrow. She called 5 minutes ago,
so I have to hurry. Anyway, so this is f
prime, prime of x. Or the second derivative. So what's happening to the
second derivative here? Well, the second derivative
is just the slope of the derivative. So what's the slope? Well, it's just a constant,
in this case, it's just a constant upward moving slope. So the second derivative
actually, if we were to just evaluate that it would be 2a. So it's going to look
something like this. And I can actually it's going
to look it's just going to be a constant number, and it's
going to be positive. So, in general, when you study
your extrema points, and say, whether it's a minimum or a
maximum, et cetera, et cetera. The way that you think about it
is, well, if it's a minimum point like this if it's a
minimum point, what is happening to the
slope around it? Well, the slope has to be
constantly increasing, right? Even though, for example. Even though, as we go from
here to here, the value of f of x is decreasing. The rate at which it's
decreasing is getting less. So the slope is
actually increasing. It's getting less
and less negative. And then it increases
even more. So you know you're at a
minimum point when the slope is increasing. And similarly, you know that
it's concave upwards when the second derivative is positive. So hopefully that helps you a
little bit, getting the intuition of what happens when
you're at a minimum point and you're concave upwards. Well, what happens when
you have the opposite? Well, pretty much everything
becomes the opposite. Let's say that this
is your curve. I know that this is the x-axis. If that's your curve,
well, here you have a very high slope. Then your slope becomes a
little bit less, then it becomes 0, then it becomes a
little bit more negative, then it becomes more negative. Then it goes more negative. The rate of the slope becomes
more and more negative the whole time that we're kind of
going through this maximum point, or this
concave downward. So what will the
slope look like? Well, in this example, if I
were to draw the derivative, the slope is going to
look something like this. Because back here, the slope
is actually, a really high number is going to be up here. And then as we get close as
we move further and further, increasing values of x
the slope decreases. It becomes 0 right around here. And then it just
keeps decreasing. And then similarly, if we were
to draw the second derivative, what will that look like? Well, the second derivative
is just going to be the slope of this function. So it's just going to be a
negative number, if we assume that this is constant. So the second if this is
the x-axis, the second derivative is going to
be something like that. It's going to be some
negative number. I'm assuming this is 0, 0. Anyway, I'm about to run out
of well, I'm not about to run out of time, but I think
I don't want to rush it. So, that's the maximum,
minimum points. And in the next video, I'll
give you a little intuition on what happens with
inflection points. And then we will do a bunch of
examples that you will normally see in a calculus textbook. But I just wanted to do this
for you because there's nothing magical about a lot of the
rules that you'll learn. You know, when they say, oh,
you take the second derivative. And if the second derivative is
positive, it's concave upwards. And if the second derivative
is negative, it's concave downwards. And you might, you know,
fill your brain with all of these memorizations. But it's hopefully if
you think about it this way fairly intuitive. And hopefully, it should be
fairly intuitive that whenever the first derivative
is 0, your slope is 0. And you're at a point
that is interesting, at least in this context. But anyway, I will do the next
video on inflection points, and then I'll do a bunch
of actual problems. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Inflection Points and Concavity Intuition
The idea of concativity
will show up a lot in your calculus class. Well, what I want to do in this
video is, one, show you what concativity is, or what concave
upwards and what concave downwards is, and to have an
intuition of what those mean, and then discuss the ideas of
inflection points, which are really just transition points
between being either concave upwards and downwards or
between downwards and upwards. So the two ideas that we'll
talk about, one is being concave upwards I'll write
that in this column right here, and maybe in pink I'll
show you what the concave downwards looks like. So a very simple way to think
about it is that concave upwards is kind of a U shape. That's why it's called
concave upwards. It might look
something like this. Let me draw some axes so
you know that I'm actually graphing something and
not just drawing a U. So maybe if that is my axis
right there, a concave upwards graph would look
something like this. And we do it in green. It could look
something like this. So this graph, it'll just
keep going as x goes positive and negative. Over the entire domain of this
function, this is my f of x right here, it is concave
upwards, and you can see it has this U shape. And I'll discuss in a second
what implication that has for its slope or what the slope is
doing, but this is just very easy to recognize visually. Similarly, let me
draw an axis again. I want to show you what
concave downwards looks like. Let me draw some
axes right there. I'm just trying an
arbitrary function f of x. It could be anywhere. It doesn't have to be you
know, the bottom point doesn't have to be in the first
quadrant like this. It's just the general U
shape I wanted to show you for concave upwards. Concave downwards, you could
probably guess what it looks like based on if this is
upwards, downwards is just going to be opposite. It might look
something like this. It might look something like
this, so maybe this is some other function g of x. And notice, it looks
like an upside down U. Over the entire domain
of this function, it is concave downwards. So you can look at it, and
immediately see that, oh, well, if it's like a U, it's upwards. If it's like an upside
down U, it's downwards. But what does that actually
mean for the slope? So to understand that, let's
think about what's happening to the slope here. So I'm just going
to do it visually. So at that point, the slope of
the tangent line, or the slope of the actual graph, or the
instantaneous slope, however you want to view it let me
see how well I can draw it it'll look something like that,
and that's the tangent line. Then as we increase x, so
that's at this x-value right here, right? At that x-value, the
slope looks like that. It's fairly negative. Now, as we increase x, maybe
we go to another point right here, what happens? The tangent line will
look like this. It's still downward sloping,
but it's less downward sloping now, right? Here, it was a very
steep downward slope. Now it's a less steep
downward slope. And we can keep going if
we go to this point. We're still downward sloping,
but even less steep. And that keeps happening. We keep getting less and less
downward sloping, or less steep in the downward direction,
until we get to this minimum point, and you've seen this
before, where our slope actually gets to zero, and
it just keeps increasing. It keeps increasing over here. If we go to this point, now
we're going we have a steep upward increase. As we increase our x even
further, the slope at this point right here, it's
increased even more. It's a steeper upward
sloping curve. So I want to make it very
clear, even though if we go to this left-hand point here, we
had a very steep downward sloping curve, and as we went
up here, we went upward sloping the whole time as our x
increased, the whole time as we increased x, what was
happening to the slope? The slope was increasing. So as we increased x,
the slope increased. And this is the definition of
a concave upwards interval or section of this curve. In this case, it was
this entire curve. I'll start showing you
functions that mix it up in a little bit. Over here, we were
very negative. We became less negative. Becoming less negative is the
same thing as increasing. Even less negative over here. Then we were completely flat. Zero is a higher slope than
some negative slope here. And then we became positive,
and more positive, and even more positive, so the entire
time our slope is increasing. Now, let's look at the
concave downward scenario. Let's start with a relatively
low x, maybe right here. Here we have a pretty high
slope, right, at this point? We have a very steep
upward slope. As x increases, so we go to
a less negative x, so x is increasing, we still have an
upward slope, but it's less upward. So our slope has decreased. And over here, it's still an
upward sloping curve, right? It's going from the bottom
left to the top right, but it's flatter. It's flattening. It's becoming less positive
until we get to this point. I didn't draw the original
curve that well, where we get to maybe a maximum point
because the slope goes to zero. And as we increase now, our
slope becomes negative. It becomes even more negative. It becomes even more negative,
so as we kind of travel, as we increase our x, as we increase
our x over this curve, our slope decreases. Slope is decreasing. Slope decreases. I want to make that very clear. The slope was very positive. This doesn't mean that
the slope is negative. It's just saying that over the
entire interval, the slope continues to decrease. It goes from very positive,
to less positive, to less positive, to zero, to slightly
negative, to more negative, to very negative, so it just
decreases the whole time. In concave upwards, it
increases the whole time. So let me draw an example
that might have the combination of the two. Maybe I'll leave this
around just so we can look at it for reference. Let me draw an
axis right there. Not the straightest line
in the world, but it'll suit our purposes. Let me just draw
some curve here. So maybe I have something
that looks like that. Maybe I have a curve that
looks something like that. Now, over what interval of this
function's domain, maybe I'll call it h of x, is this curve
concave upwards or concave downwards? Well, you can look at it just
from inspection, just from that original definition. I said that concave upwards is
when you're like a U, concave downwards is when you're
like an upside down U. So over here it looks like
a U from roughly this point onwards, right? We have this U shape. We have this U shape and
maybe the curve just keeps going on there. So, from here onwards, we are
concave let me write it over here from there onwards, we
are I don't know want to do it in the same color
we are concave upwards. And then on the interval before
that, from here and before this point right here, we
are concave downwards. You can just recognize that. And let's explore what's
actually happening with the slope. So over here, the tangent line
has a pretty high let me do it in a different color over
here, the tangent line has a pretty high positive slope. Then it has a less positive. Then at this maximum
point, it goes to zero. Then it goes slightly
negative, even more negative, even more negative. So up until this point, the
slope is decreasing, which is completely consistent with
what we said about being concave downwards. But then something interesting
happens at a point right about there. I'm not being very accurate or
precise right there, but right about there, you see that the
slope of the tangent line looks like that, right? And that was more negative than
right here, which is more negative than right there. But over here, something
interesting happens. All of a sudden, my slope
starts to increase again. It starts to I
want to draw it. Let me draw it as neatly as
I could possibly draw it. So over here, the slope
look something like this. So if we go backwards from
there, if we go into more negative x's, the x's before
that had a less negative slope, so the slope was decreasing. But all of a sudden here,
when we go here, the slope is slightly higher. It's less negative there, then
it's even less negative there, then it goes to zero here, then
it goes slightly positive, and even more positive. So up until this point in
are functions domain, our slope was decreasing. Our slope was decreasing
up until this point. And then after that point,
our slope is increasing. So this point, it seems like
we should call it something, and we do call it something. This point right here, where we
go from concave downwards to concave upwards, and it would
actually be true if it was the other way around, this is
called an inflection point. And this would also be called
an inflection point if it was the other way. If we went from a curve let
me draw a curve that looks like this that was concave upwards
and then it's concave downwards, the point that we're
switching, the point at which you go from one to the other,
essentially your rate of the change of slope switches signs,
that is an inflection. So this is also an
inflection point. So what does this mean? Hopefully, you understand
visually what concave upwards and concave downwards means,
and an inflection point, but what does this mean for
the second derivative? Remember, the derivative is
the rate of change so let me write this down. So f of x, that's just
the function, right? That's just the function. That's what we've
been graphing. f prime of x, that's the slope
of the function, slope of function at any point x. You've seen that
multiple times already. What's the second derivative? Well, you could view it
as the derivative of the first derivative, right? That's the slope of the
slope, or the rate of change of the slope itself. So what did we say
about concave upwards? concave upwards is when the
slope is increasing, which means that the rate of change
of the slope is positive. Well, what that means is that
the second derivative, which is the slope of the slope, f prime
of x, is going to be greater than zero. That's what concave upwards
just tells us, right? Because if this is greater than
zero, then that means that the rate of change of the
slope is positive. That's what we said
was concave upwards. Now, in concave downwards,
the slope is decreasing. The rate of change of the
slope is decreasing, or it's a negative. So in that case, the
second derivative would be less than zero. And then in the situation when
we're switching, if over here let's look at this situation. We're concave downwards. We're concave downwards over
this interval right here. That means that the second
derivative has to be less than zero over this interval. The rate of change of
the slope is negative. It's decreasing. So over this interval, our
second derivative is less than zero, but then we go concave
upwards, so our second derivative has to be greater
than zero over this interval, which implies if our second
derivative is continuous, that the second derivative had to be
equal to zero at that point. I'll do that with some
examples in future videos. Now, this condition by itself
isn't enough to say that it's an inflection point. In order for something to be an
inflection point, the second derivative has to switch signs. It has to go from being
negative in a concave downward to positive in concave upwards,
or it has to go from positive in concave upwards to negative
in concave downwards. And obviously, in between,
it's going to switch. If you're switching signs,
you're going to hit zero. So when the second derivative
is zero, it might be an inflection point, and then you
want to test around it to see if it's actually switching
signs, and I'll show you that in the next video. But hopefully, you at least
have an intuitive sense of what inflection points look like and
what the second derivative is telling us. If the slope is constantly
increasing, then the rate of change of slope is
positive, then the second derivative is positive. If the slope is decreasing,
then the rate of change of slope is negative, which
tells us that the second derivative is negative. And the point in which you're
switching from a positive second derivative to a negative
one or a negative one to a positive one, that is what is
called an inflection point. 

Transcript for: Monotonicity Theorem
Welcome back. Well, I've been requested
to do several problems by our friend [? Akosh. ?] So I thought I would
keep doing them. I'm skipping around
a little bit. Because I think if I did
all of them, it would just generate too many videos. But I encourage all of you all
to let me know if you feel that there's something that
I might have missed. But anyway, I'm just going
through some of the problems he gave. So this one and I actually
almost find it funny, because they use such formal language
for something that's actually a pretty intuitive concept. Well they say, use the
monotonicity theorem to find where the given function is
increasing, and when it is decreasing. Monotonicity theorem. It make sound very serious. Well all the monotonicity
theorem at least if I'm remembering things properly
all it says is when the derivative is positive, when f
prime of x is greater than 0, your function is increasing. And when the derivative is
negative, your function is decreasing. And why am I kind of
disparaging of this? Well what's the derivative? The derivative is the slope. And you learned in Algebra
1, that if the slope is positive, the graph of
the line is increasing. And if the slope is
negative, the graph of the line is decreasing. And the only thing that's
different now is that this function isn't necessarily
a line, it's a function. So it could be a curve. But having a positive slope
means that the value of the function is increasing. For every change it x, there's
a positive change in y. And similarly, a negative slope
says that for every change in x, no matter how small, there's
a negative change in y. So there's nothing fancy here. But let's see, they
gave some examples. So they want us to use this
theorem to find where the given function is increasing,
and when it is decreasing. So the first function
they give is f of x is equal to 3x plus 3. What's the derivative of this?
f prime of x is equal to 3. For any value of x
this is a positive. Right? F prime of x is positive
for all values of x. So this thing, using the
monotonicity theorem is positive. Sorry, it's increasing
for all values of x. And you could have done
that in the 9th grade. How? Well you would have said, this
is the slope y-intercept. The slope is 3. So this is an
increasing function. The function will look
something like this. The y-intercept is 3. And the slope is 3. So this function looks
something like that. And so it's increasing over
from minus infinite to positive infinite over that interval,
if you wanted to be fancy. But this is really just a lot
of fancy terminology to talk about, I think, something
fairly straightforward. Anyway, the next one looks a
little bit more interesting. H of z is equal to z to the
fourth over 4, minus and I hope I'm reading this right
4 z to the third over 6. So let's see if we can figure
out when this is increasing, and when this is decreasing,
when the function is increasing or decreasing. So what's the
derivative of this? H prime of z is equal to 4. This will cancel out. So it's z to the third,
4z to the third over 4. So it's z to the third minus 3
times 4 is 12z squared over 6. So it's 2 2z squared. So we just have to figure out
when is this function greater than 0, and when is this
function less than 0. And to figure this out, we
really just have to break out our algebra toolkit to figure
out well one, when does this function equal 0? So let's set z-cubed minus
2z squared is equal to 0. We could factor
out a z-squared. And then we have z
minus 2 is equal to 0. So we know that either
z-squared is equal to 0, or z minus 2 is equal to 0. So the points at which the
derivative is 0, so H prime of 0 is equal to 0,
and H prime of 2. And that's just our Algebra 2. So H prime of 2 is equal to 0. And so we just have to figure
out what happens in the interval maybe when we're
below 0, between 0 and 2, and then above 2. So what is the derivative? So when we're below 0,
let's just take a point. Let's say H prime of negative
1 is equal to what? That is equal to negative 1 to
the third is negative 1, minus 2 times negative 1 squared. Well negative 1 squared
is just positive 1. So it's minus 2. So it equals minus 3. OK, let's take a point
in between these two. Well 1 is in between them. So let's just take H prime
of 1 is equal to 1 minus 2. Lets make sure I'm
doing that right. Because it's 1 squared. So it equals negative
1, H prime of 1. And then what happens when we
go of z values greater than 2. So let's try 3. H prime of 3 is equal to what? H prime of 3 is equal to 27
what's minus 2 times 9. It's equal to 9,
right, 18, right. So it's positive. So, what do we know? We know that in all fairness,
this is kind of an interesting problem. Because the derivative
is negative. So if we were to draw the
derivative of this, what are the interesting points? It's 0. So that's the x-axis. That's 0. And then we had 2. And I'm going to draw
the derivative. I'm not drawing the
actual function. Because the monotonicity
theorem, we care about whether the derivative
is positive or negative. So what this tells us is
that the derivative, it was a negative when we're
to left of 0, right? Because we just
took a test point. Because we know it's 0 here. But then what happened? It's not like it
got positive then. It went back negative
again when we tried to derivative it once. It probably does
something like this. Now what would it be? Then it goes up at 2 where
it's greater than 0. Right. I was confusing
myself for a second. Right. So the derivative, it starts. But it never goes
above right there. So the derivative probably
has a bit of a maximum point there or something. This is the
derivative, remember. That's why I was
confusing myself. And then it probably
flips around, and then goes above there. But from the monotonicity
theorem, what do we care about? We care about the intervals
where the derivative is positive, and the
derivative is negative. So if the derivative is
positive for all of these values, for z
is greater than 2. So we could say, using the
monotonicity theorem, this function is increasing
when z is greater than 2. So let me write that. And then we can say that the
function is decreasing. We could say flat or
decreasing, right? Because the slope of the
function is 0 right here. And remember this is the
graph of the derivative. So we could say flat
or decreasing when z is less than 2. You normally do consider flat,
monotonic in one direction. So you could say monotonic
increasing would still include something that
kind of flattens out. Well anyway, I'm
pushing ten minutes. And I don't think I have time
for the next problem, which I might do in the next video. But hopefully you found
that a little bit helpful, and not too confusing. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Calculus: Maximum and minimum values on an interval
I've been requested to do some
problems on critical points and maxima, minima, and concavity,
so I will do some problems. So these were sent to
me by [? Akosh ?]. I don't know where he is but
these are interesting problems and I haven't done anything
like these before, so I thought I would do the exact
problem he's given. So the first problem says,
identify the critical point, and find the maximum and
minimum value on the given interval. And they say f of x is equal
to x squared plus 4x plus 4. And the interval that they care
about is from minus 4, and including minus 4 that's why
we have the brackets there to 0. And just so you know, this
interval notation, if it was written like this with
parentheses, it would mean all the numbers between minus 4 and
0, but not including them. This is a closed interval,
so you're including minus 4 and you're including 0. This is called an
open interval. But anyway you can ignore
this, because that's not what was in the problem. So the first thing they ask is
what are the critical points. And different people use
different terminology, but my understanding is critical
points are all the points that are interesting. So it's the points where the
derivatives equal to 0, or the derivative just doesn't exist. But as we see in this interval,
we'll stick to the derivative. f prime of x is
equal to 2x plus 4. So why does this equal to 0? Let's see. 2x plus 4 is equal to 0. 2x is equal to minus 4. I just almost made
a mistake there. x is equal to minus 2. When x is equal to minus
2, what is f of minus 2? So we know that f prime
of minus 2 is equal 0. We just solved for that. So we know the slope
is 0 at that point. But I just want to know what
the coordinate point is. So f of minus 2 is
4 minus 8 plus 4. So f minus 2 is 0. Let's evaluate the function
at the end points of this interval. f of minus 4 is equal to
minus 4 squared is 16. Minus 16, 4 times, so that's 0. And then plus 4, so
f of minus 4 is 4. And then what's f of 0? f of 0 is equal to well
that's 0 0, that's equal to 4. So now we could graph this. Let me graph the difference. So if this is the x-axis and
that is the y-axis, and the interval that we care about is
from x is equal to minus 4. From minus 4 to 0. So the first thing they
said, we'll identify the critical points. Well the critical points were
when the slope is equal to 0. And that's when f is equal to
minus 2, and that happens at the point minus 2,0, so it's
right here, which is directly in between those two
points incidentally. Which is a good intuition
behind why these two values are equal, because this is a
parabola and it's symmetric, so if you go 2 away on either
side, the function should have the same value. But anyway, ignore that
if it confused you. So at minus 2 we have
a negative slope. f of 0 is equal to 4. And f of minus 4 is equal to 4. So the graph is going to
look something like this. And I'll do it in
another color. And since we only care about
that interval, let's only graph it over that interval. It's going to look
something like that. And if you said this was a
critical point and they want to know the maximum
and the minimum point. Well the minimum point
is pretty clear. It's this critical point right
here where the derivative was equal to 0. And if you wanted to use you
know whatever they call it, the concavity theorem. But hopefully you have
the intuition of why. You would see that the
second derivative at this point is positive. And what's the
second derivative? If that's f prime of x, f prime
of x for all x is equal to 2. So really at any point you test
you're going to get the second derivative to be positive. So especially at this critical
point where the first derivative is 0. The second derivative being
positive tells you that the slope is constantly increasing. So the rate of change of
the slope is positive. The slope is really negative
there, little less negative, goes to 0, and then keeps
increasing, becomes more positive, even more
positive slope there. So I think that was out
of scope of this exact problem, but it's good
to have that intuition. And they want to know
the maximum points. Well the value here, x
is equal to minus 4 and the value x equals 0. They're both maximum points. They tie for first place. So those are the maximum
points, x equals 0 and x equals minus 4. You could say 0,4 or minus 4,4. What's the next
problem they give? Let's see. Understanding the problem and
the terminology is often more confusing then the
problem itself. So they give h of r is equal to
1/r, and they care about the interval I'm assuming from
this interval on r from negative 1 to 3, and we're
going to include negative 1 and 3 because we have brackets. Well what are the
critical points? They're the points where either
the derivative is 0, or the derivative doesn't exist. Now this brings up an
interesting point. We'll see in a second there's a
point here where the derivative doesn't exist, but the function
also isn't defined at that point. So that's not a critical point. So in order to get a critical
point and this is a bit of a technicality. The easy one is
derivative is 0. Derivative equals 0. The other critical point and
I was little bit non-rigorous with it when I said before is
when there's no derivative. But f of x is defined. So as you're going to see in
this problem, there is a point where the derivative is
undefined but f of x or in this case, h of r is also not
defined at that point, so it won't be a critical point. Or maybe it is. I don't know. Depending on how your
teacher defines it. But the way I learned it is
a critical point if the derivative isn't defined,
but the function is. But anyway. What's the derivative here? h prime of r. Well that's r to the negative
1, right, so it becomes negative r of the negative 2,
or that's minus 1 over r squared. That's the derivative. Can this ever equal 0? Well no, it's never
going to be equal 0. But where is it undefined? Well it's undefined
when r is equal to 0. And r equal to 0 is
in that interval. So h prime of 0 is undefined. But h of 0 is also
undefined, right? 1/0 is undefined. h of 0 also undefined. So I'm not going to really
consider that to be a critical point frankly. It's just a point at which
the derivative and the function is undefined. And so what will the
graph look like? Well let's see if we
can draw the interval. And we might just want
to draw some points. That's what I always used
to do if I never got stuck on a math problem. I would just graph some points. You can ever go
wrong with that. Let's see, 1/r. So we want to go from negative
1 to 3, so we're going to have some negative values. So we want to go from r this
is the r-axis, right, because this is the function of r,
this is the h of r-axis. So we're going to go from
r is equal to negative 1 to r is equal to 3. And we could plot some points. What is h of negative 1? It's 1 over negative 1, so
it's this point right here. And then what happens is
we get to smaller and smaller negative numbers. Well think about it. If you have negative 1/2 here. When r is negative 1/2, it
goes to negative 2, and it's actually going to asymptote. We only care about this
interval, so it's going to look something like this. It's going to asymptote to
negative infinity, right, if I kept drawing this all the way
down that would just asymptote. And then what is h of 3. Well h of 3 is just
going to be 1/3. It's going to be
relatively low number. And then what's going to
happen as we get closer and closer to 0? Well if you put a really small
positive value here, you get larger and larger numbers. So this actually asymptotes to
positive infinity, so it'll look something like this. I always have trouble
drawing these hyperbolas. It's going to look something
like that, it's going to go to positive infinity. So that goes to positive
infinity, and this will on this side go to minus infinity. And frankly just looking at
this graph you see why the graph is not defined at 0. From the right hand side
the limit approaches positive infinity. From the left hand side it
approaches negative infinity, and 1/0 is just undefined. Similarly that's why you
couldn't get a derivative there either because the definition
of the derivative means you're taking a limit and the limit
has to be valid from both directions. And as we see the limit
is not valid from both directions here. So what are the maximum
and minimum points here? Well if we look at this
value, we might say oh, is that a minimum point? Well no, because you
have values much lower. Actually you have values
that go to minus infinity in this interval. And then you say, well is
this a maximum point? Well no, you have values that
go to positive infinity in this interval. So it actually turns out that
there is no I mean this isn't very proper but to some
degree at 0 you're at both positive and negative infinity
depending on what direction you're coming from. But this really has no maximum
or minimum points, because the graph is undefined at 0. And then you know if I said, oh
well what if I get really close to 0 and I called that
the maximum point. Then you say, no, no, no, no,
but there's a point even closer that has even a higher value,
that's even closer to infinity. So there's actually no
exact point that is the maximum value. So that's kind of interesting. Anyway, I'm already at 11
minutes and people at YouTube apparently let me go well past
the limit now, but people told me that they like the 10 minute
nuggets of knowledge, so I will stop now and I'll continue
these problems in a future video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Graphing using derivatives | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's see if we can use
everything we know about differentiation and
concativity, and maximum and minimum points, and inflection
points, to actually graph a function without using a
graphing calculator. So let's say our function,
let's say that f of x is equal to 3x to the fourth minus
4x to the third plus 2. And of course, you could always
graph a function just by trying out a bunch of points, but we
want to really focus on the points that are interesting to
us, and then just to get the general shape of the function,
especially we want to focus on the things that we can take out
from this function using our calculus toolkit, or our
derivative toolkit. So the first thing we probably
want to do, is figure out the critical points. We want to figure out, I'll
write here, critical points. And just as a refresher of what
critical points means, it's the points where the derivative
of f of x is 0. So critical points are f prime
of x is either equal to 0, or it's undefined. This function looks
differentiable everywhere, so the critical points that we
worried about are probably, well, I can tell you, they're
definitely just the points where f prime of x are
going to be equal to 0. This derivative, f prime of x,
is going to actually be defined over the entire domain. So let's actually write down
the derivative right now. So the derivative of this,
f prime of x, this is pretty straightforward. The derivative of 3x to the
fourth, 4 times 3 is 12, 12x to the, we'll just
decrement the 4 by 1, 3. Right? You just multiply times the
exponent, and then decrease the new exponent by one, minus 3
times 4 is 12, times x to the 1 less than 3 is 2. And then the derivative of
a constant, the slope of a constant, you could
almost imagine, is zero. It's not changing. A constant, by definition,
isn't changing. So that's f prime of x. So let's figure out
the critical points. The critical points are where
this thing is either going to be equal to 0, or
it's undefined. Now, I can look over the entire
domain of real numbers, and this thing is defined
pretty much anywhere. I could put any number here,
and it's not going to blow up. It's going to give me an answer
to what the function is. So that it's defined
everywhere, so let's just figure out where
it's equal to 0. So f prime of x is equal to 0. So let's solve, which x is,
let's solve I don't have to rewrite that, I
just wrote that. Let's solve for when
this is equal to 0. And I'll do it in
the same color. So 12x to the third minus
12x squared is equal to 0. And so let's what we
can do to solve this. We could factor out a 12x. So if we factor out a 12x, then
this term becomes just x, and then actually, let's
factor out a 12x squared. We factor out a 12x squared. If we divide both of these by
12x squared, this term just becomes an x, and then minus
12x squared divided by 12x squared is just 1,
is equal to 0. I just rewrote this
top thing like this. You could go the other way. If I distributed this 12x
squared times this entire quantity, you would get my
derivative right there. So the reason why did that is
because, to solve for 0, or if I want all of the x's that make
this equation equal to 0, I now have written it in a form
where I'm multiplying one thing by another thing. And in order for this to be
0, one or both of these things must be equal to 0. So 12x squared are equal to 0,
which means that x is equal to 0 will make this
quantity equals 0. And the other thing that would
make this quantity 0 is if x minus 1 is equal to 0. So x minus 1 is equal to
0 when x is equal to 1. So these are 2 critical points. Our 2 critical points are x is
equal to 0 and x is equal to 1. And remember, those are just
the points where our first derivative is equal to 0. Where the slope is 0. They might be maximum points,
they might be minimum points, they might be inflection
points, we don't know. They might be, you know, if
this was a constant function, they could just be anything. So we really can't say a lot
about them just yet, but they are points of interest. I guess that's all we can say. That they are definitely
points of interest. But let's keep going, and
let's try to understand the concativity, and maybe we can
get a better sense of this graph. So let's figure out the
second derivative. I'll do that in
this orange color. So the second derivative of my
function f, let's see, 3 times 12 is 36x squared minus 24x. So let's see. Well, there's a couple
of things we can do. Now that we know the second
derivative, we can answer the question, is my graph concave
upwards or downwards at either of these points? So let's figure out what,
at either of these critical points. And it'll all fit together. Remember, if it's concave
upwards, then we're kind of in a U shape. If it's concave downwards,
then we're in a kind of upside down U shape. So f prime prime, our second
derivative, at x is equal to 0, is equal to what? It's equal to 36 0 squared
minus 24 times 0. So that's just 0. So f prime prime is
just equal to 0. We're neither concave upwards
nor concave downwards here. It might be a transition point. It may not. If it is a transition point,
then we're dealing with an inflection point. We're not sure yet. Now let's see what f prime
prime, our second derivative, evaluated at 1 is. So that's 36 times 1, let me
write it down, that's equal to 36 times 1 squared, which
is 36, minus 24 times 1. So it's 36 minus 24,
so it's equal to 12. So this is positive, our second
derivative is positive here. It's equal to 12, which
means our first derivative, our slope is increasing. The rate of change of our
slope is positive here. So at this point right here,
we are concave upwards. Which tells me that this
is probably a minimum point, right? The slope is 0 here, but we are
concave upwards at that point. So that's interesting. So let's see if there
any other potential inflection points here. We already know that this is a
potential inflection point. Let me circle it in red. It's a potential
inflection point. We don't know whether
our function actually transitions at that point. We'll have to experiment
a little bit to see if that's really the case. But let's see if there any
other inflection points, or potential inflection points. So let's see if this
equals 0 anywhere else. So 36 x squared minus
24 x is equal to 0. Let's solve for x. Let us factor out, well,
we can factor out 12x. 12x times 3x, right, 3x
times 12x is 36x squared, minus 2, is equal to 0. So these two are
equivalent expressions. If you multiply this out,
you'll get this thing up here. So this thing is going to be
equal to 0, either if 12 x is equal to 0, so 12 x is equal
to zero, that gives us x is equal to zero. So at x equals 0,
this thing equals 0. So the second derivative is 0
there, and we already knew that, because we tested
that number out. Or this thing, if this
expression was 0, then the entire second derivative
would also be zero. So let's write that. So 3x minus 2 is equal to 0, 3x
is equal to 2, just adding 2 to both sides, 3x is equal to 2/3. So this is another interesting
point that we haven't really hit upon before that might
be an inflection point. The reason why is it
might be, is because the second derivative is
definitely 0 here. You put 2/3 here,
you're going to get 0. So what we have to do, is see
whether the second derivative is positive or negative
on either side of 2/3. We already have a
sense of that. I mean, we could try out
a couple of numbers. We know that, you know, if we
say that x is greater than 2/3. Let me scroll down a
little bit, just so we have some space. So let's see what happens
when x is greater than 2/3, what is f prime prime? What is the second derivative? So let's try out a value
that's pretty close, just to get a sense of things. So let me rewrite it. f prime
prime of x is equal to, let me write like this. I mean, I could write like
that, but this might be easier to deal with. It's equal to 12x
times 3x minus 2. So if x is greater than 2/3,
this term right here is going to be positive. That's definitely, any
positive number times 12 is going to be positive. But what about this
term, right here? 3 times 2/3 minus 2
is exactly 0, right? That's 2 minus 2. But anything larger than that,
3 times, you know, if I had 2.1/3, this is going to
be a positive quantity. Any value of x greater than
2/3 will make this thing right here positive. Right? This thing is also
going to be positive. So that means that when x
is greater than 2/3, that tells us that the second
derivative is positive. It is greater than 0. So in our domain, as long
as x is larger than 2/3, we are concave upwards. And we saw that here,
at x is equal to 1. We were concave upwards. But what about x
being less than 2/3? So when x is less than 2/3,
let me write it, let me scroll down a little bit. When x is less than
2/3, what's going on? I'll rewrite it. f prime prime of x,
second derivative, 12x times 3x minus 2. Well, if we go really far left,
we're going to get a negative number here, and this might
be negative. But if we just go right
below 2/3, when we're still in the positive domain. So if this was like 1.9/3,
which is a mix of a decimal and a fraction, or even 1/3, this
thing is still going to be positive. Right below 2/3, this thing is
still going to be positive. We're going to be multiplying
12 by a positive number. But what's going on right here? At 2/3, we're exactly 0. But as you go to anything
less than 2/3, 3 times 1/3 is only 1. 1 minus 2, you're going
to get negative numbers. So when x is less than 2/3,
this thing right here is going to be negative. So the second derivative, if x
is less than 2/3, the second derivative, right to the left,
right when you go less than 2/3, the seconds derivative
of x is less than 0. Now the fact that we have this
transition, from when we're less than 2/3, we have a
negative second derivative, and when we're greater than 2/3, we
have a positive second derivative, that tells us that
this, indeed, is an inflection point. That x is equal to 2/3 thirds
is definitely an inflection point for our original
function up here. Now, we have one more candidate
inflection point, and then we're ready to graph. Then, you know, once you do all
the inflection points and the max and the minimum, you are
ready to graph the function. So let's see if x is equal to
0 is an inflection point. We know that the second
derivative is 0 at 0. But what happens above and
below the second derivative? So let me do our
little test here. So when x is, let me draw a
line so we don't get confused with all of the stuff
that I wrote here. So when x is greater than
0, what's happening in the second derivative? Remember, the second
derivative was equal to 12x times 3x minus 2. I like writing it this way,
because you've kind of decomposed it into two linear
expressions, and you could see whether each of them are
positive or negative. So if x is greater than 0, this
thing right here is definitely going to be positive, and then
this thing right here, right when you go right above x is
greater than 0, so we have to make sure to be very close
to this number, right? So this number,
let's say it's 0.1. You're right above 0. So this isn't going to be true
for all of x greater than 0. We just want to test exactly
what happens, right when we go right above 0. So this is 0.1. You would have 0.3, 0.3
minus 2, that would be a negative number, right? So right as x goes right
above 0, this thing right here is negative. So at x is greater than 0,
you will have your second derivative is going
to be less than 0. You're concave downwards. Which makes sense, because at
some point, we're going to be hitting a transition. Remember, we were concave
downwards before we got to 2/3, right? So this is consistent. From 0 to 2/3, we are concave
downwards, and then at 2/3, we become concave upwards. Now let's see what happens when
x is right less than, when x is just barely, just
barely less than 0. So once again, f prime, the
second derivitive of x is equal to 12x times 3x minus 2. Well, right. If x was minus 0.1 or 0.0001,
no matter what, this thing is going to be negative, this
expression right here is going to be negative, the 12x, right,
you just have some negative value here, times 12, is
going to be negative. And then what's
this going to be? Well, 3 times minus 0.1 is
going to be minus 0.3, minus 2 is minus 2.3. You're definitely going
to have a negative. This value right here is going
to be negative, and then when you subtract from a negative,
it's definitely going to be negative. So that is also going
to be negative. But if you multiply a negative
times a negative, you're going to get a positive. So actually, right below x
is less than 0, the second derivative is positive. Now, this all might have been a
little bit confusing, but we should now have the payoff. We now have the payoff. We have all of the
interesting things going on. We know that at x is equal to
1, we know that at x is equal to 1, let me write
it over here. We've figured out at x is
equal to 1, the slope is 0. So f prime prime is, sorry,
let me write this way. I should have said, we
know that the slope is 0. Slope is equal to 0. And we figured that out because
the first derivative was 0. This was a critical point. And we know that we're dealing
with, the function is concave upwards at this point. And that tells us that this is
going to be a minimum point. And we should actually get
the coordinates so we can actually graph it. That was the whole
point of this video. So f of 1 is equal to what? f of 1, let's go back to our
original function, is 3 times 1, right, 1 to the fourth is
just 1, 3 times 1 minus 4 plus 2, right? So it's 3 times 1 minus 4 times
1, which is minus 1, plus 2, well, that's just a positive 1. So f of 1 is one. And then we know at x is equal
to 0, we also figured out that the slope is equal to 0. But we figured out that this
was an inflection point, right? The concativity switches
before and after. So this is an inflection point. And we are concave below
0, so when x is less than 0, we are upwards. Our second derivative
is positive. And when x is it greater
than 0, we are downwards. We're concave downwards. Right above, not for all
of the [? domain ?] x and 0, just right
above 0, downwards. And then what is f of 0,
just so we know, because we want to graph that point? f of 0. See, f of 0, this is easy. 3 times 0 minus 4 times 0
plus 2, that's just 2. f of 0 is 2. And then finally we got the
point, x is equal to 2/3. Let me do that in
another color. We had the point x
is equal to 2/3. We figured out that this
was an inflection point. The slope definitely isn't 0
there, because it wasn't one of the critical points. And we know that
we are downwards. We know that when x is less
than 2/3, or right less than 2/3, we are concave downwards. And when x is greater than 2/3,
we saw it up here, when x was greater than 2/3, right up
here, we were concave upwards. The second derivative
was positive. We were upwards. Now we could actually figure
out, what's f of 2/3? That's actually a little
bit complicated. We don't even have to
figure that out, I don't think, to graph. I think we could do a pretty
good job of graphing it just with what we know right now. So that's our take aways. Let me do a rough graph. Let's see. So let me do my axes,
just like that. So we're going to want to
graph the point 0, 2. So let's say that
the point, 0, 2. So this is x is equal to
0, and we go up, 1, 2. So this is the point 0, 2. Maybe I'll do it in that
color, the color I was using, so that's this color. So that's that
point right there. Then we have the point x,
we have f of 1, which is the point 1, 1, right? So this point right here. So that's the point 1, 1. This was the point 0, 2. And then we have x is equal
to 2/3, which is our inflection point. So when x is 2/3, we
don't know exactly what number f of 2/3 is. Maybe here someplace. Let's say f of 2/3
is right there. So that's the point, 2/3, and
then wherever f of 2/3 is. It looks like it's going
to be 1 point something. f of 2/3. You could calculate it, if
you like, you just have to substitute back
in the function. But we're ready to
graph this thing. So we know that at x is
equal to 1, the slope is 0. We know that the slope is 0. It's flat here. We know it's concave upwards. So we're dealing, it looks
like this, looks like that over that interval. We're concave upwards. And we know we're concave
upwards from x is equal to 2/3 and on, right? Let me do it in that color. We knew x equals 2/3 and
on, we're concave upwards. And that's why I was able
to draw this U-shape. Now we know that when x is less
than 2/3 and greater than 0, we're concave downwards. So the graph would look
something like this, over this interval. We'll be concave downwards. Let me draw it nicely. Over this interval, the
slope is decreasing. And you could see it, if you
keep drawing tangent lines. It's flattish there, it gets
negative, more negative, more negative, until the inflection
point, and then it starts increasing again, because we
go back to concave upwards. And then finally, the last
interval is below 0, and we know below 0, when x is less
than 0, we're concave upwards. So the graph looks like this. The graph looks like that. And we also know that x is
equal to 0 was a critical point, the slope of 0. So the graph is actually
flat right there, too. So this is an inflection point
where the slope was also 0. So this is our final graph. We're done. After all that work, we were
able to use our calculus skills, and our knowledge of
inflection points, and concativity, and transitions
in concativity, to actually graph this fairly
hairy-looking graph. But this should be kind of what
it looks like, if you graph it on your calculator. 

Transcript for: Another example graphing with derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say we've got the
function, f of x is equal to the natural log of x
to the fourth plus 27. And all we want to do is take
its first and second derivatives, and use as much of
our techniques as we have at our disposal to attempt
to graph it without a graphing calculator. If we have time, I'll take out
the graphing calculator and see if our answer matches up. So a good place to start
is to take the first derivative of this. So let me do that over here. So the derivative of f. Well, you take the derivative
of the inside, so take the derivative of that right there,
which is 4x to the third, and then multiply it times the
derivative of the outside, with respect to the inside. So the derivative of the
natural log of x is 1over x. So the derivative of this whole
thing with respect to this inside expression is going
to be, so times 1 over x to the fourth plus 27. If you found that confusing,
you might want to rewatch the chain rule videos. But that's the first
derivative of our function. I could rewrite this, this is
equal to 4x to the third over x to the fourth, plus 27. Or I could write it as 4x to
the third times x to the fourth, plus 27 to
the negative 1. All three of these
expressions are equivalent. I'm just the writing, I
multiplied it out, or I could write this as a negative
exponent, or I could write this as a fraction, with
this in the denominator. They're all the equivalent. So that's our first derivative. Let's do our second derivative. Our second derivative,
this looks like it'll get a little bit hairier. So our second derivative is
the derivative of this. So it's equal to, we can now
use the product rule, is the derivative of this first
expression, times the second expression. So the derivative of this first
expression, 3 times 4is 12. 12x squared, right, we just
decrement the 3 by 1, times the second expression, times x to
the fourth plus 27 to the minus 1, and then to that, we want to
add just the first expression, not its derivative, so just 4x
to the third, times the derivative of the
second expression. And the derivative of the
second expression, we could take the derivative of the
inside, which is just 4x to the third, the derivative of 27 is
just 0, so times 4x to the third, times the derivative
of this whole thing with respect to the inside. So times, so you take this
exponent, put out front, so times minus 1, times this whole
thing, x to the fourth plus 27 to the, we decrement this
by one more, so minus two. So let's see if I can simplify
this expression a little bit. So this is equal to, so this
right here is equal to 12x squared over this thing, x to
the fourth plus 27, and then, let's see, if we multiply we're
going to have a minus here, so it's a minus, you multiply
these two guys, 4 times 4is 16, 16x to the third times x to the
third is x to the sixth, over this thing squared. Over x to the fourth
plus 27 squared. That's just another way to
rewrite that expression right there, right? To the minus 2, you just put in
the denominator and make it into a positive 2 in
the denominator. Same thing. Now, if you've seen these
problems in the past, we always want to set these
things equal to 0. We want to solve
for x equals 0. So it'll be useful to have this
expressed as just one fraction, instead of the difference or
the sum of two fractions. So what we can do, is we could
have a common denominator. So we could multiply both the
numerator and denominator of this expression by x to the
fourth plus 27, and what do we get? So this is equal to, so if we
multiply this first expression, times x to the fourth plus 27,
we get 12x squared, times x to the fourth, plus 27. And then in the denominator,
you have x to the fourth plus 27 squared. All I did, I multiplied this
numerator and this denominator by x to the the fourth plus 27. I didn't change it. And then we have
that second term. Minus 16 x to the sixth over x
to the fourth plus 27 squared. The whole reason why did that? Now I have a common
denominator, now I can just add the numerators. So this is going to be
equal to, let's see. The denominator, we know what
the denominator is, it is x to the fourth plus 27 squared. That's our denominator. And then we can
multiply this out. This is 12x squared
times x to the fourth. That's 12x to the sixth,
plus 27 times 12. I don't even feel like
multiplying 27 times 12,so I'll just write that out. So plus 27 times 12x squared, I
just multiplied the 12x squared times the 27, and then minus
16x to the sixth minus 16x to the sixth. And this simplifies to,
let's see if I can simplify this even further. 7x to the sixth here,
x to the sixth here. So this is equal to,
do this in pink. This is equal to the 27 times
12x squared, I don't feel like figuring that out right now,
times 12x squared, and then you have minus 16x to the sixth
and plus 12x to the sixth. So you add those two,
you get minus 4. 12 minus 15is minus 4, x to the
sixth, all of that over x to the fourth plus 27
plus 27 squared. And that is our
second derivative. Now, we've done all of the
derivatives, and this was actually a pretty
hairy problem. And now we can solve for when
the first and the second derivatives equal 0, and we'll
have our candidate, well, we'll know our critical points, and
then we'll have our candidate inflection points, and
see if we can make any headway from there. So first, let's see where our
first derivative is equal to 0, and get our critical points. Or at least maybe, also
maybe, where it's undefined. So this is equal to 0. If we want to set, if the only
place that this can equal to 0 is if this numerator
is equal to 0. This denominator, actually, if
we are assuming we're dealing with real numbers, this term
right here is always going to be greater than or equal to 0
for any value of x, because it's an even exponent. So this thing can never equals
0, right, because you're adding 27 to something
that's non-negative. So this will never equal
0, so this will also never be undefined. So there's no undefined
critical points here, but we could set the numerator
equal to 0 pretty easily. If we wanted to set this equal
to 0, we just say 4x to the third is equal to 0, and we
know what x-value will make that equal to 0, x has
to be equal to 0. 4 times something to the
third is equal to 0, that something has to be 0. x to the third has to
be 0, x has to be 0. So we can write, f prime
of 0 is equal to 0. So 0 is a critical point. 0 is a critical point. The slope at 0 is 0. We don't know if it's a
maximum or a minimum, or an inflection point yet. We'll explore it a
little bit more. And actually, just so
we get the coordinate, what's the coordinate? The coordinate x is 0, and then
y is the natural log if x is 0, this just turns out, it's
the a natural log of 27. Let me figure out what that is,
I'll get the calculator out. I said I wouldn't use a
graphing calculator, but I can use a regular calculator. So27, if I were to take the
natural log of that, for our purposes let's
just call it 3.3. We're just trying to get the
general shape of the graph. So 3.3. Well, we could just say
2.9 and it kept going. So this is a critical
point right here. The slope is 0 here. Slope is equal to 0
at x is equal to 0. So this is one thing
we want to block off. And let's see if we can
find any candidate inflection points. And remember, candidate
inflection points are where the second derivative equals 0. Now if the second derivative
equals 0, that doesn't tell us that those are definitely
inflection points. Let me make this very clear. If, let me do it
in a new color. If x is inflection, then the
second derivative at x is going to be equal to 0. Because you're having
a change concavity. You have a change in the slope,
goes from either increasing to decreasing or from
decreasing to increasing. But if the derivative is equal
to 0, the second derivative is equal to 0, you cannot assume
that is an inflection point. So what we're going to do is,
we're going to find all of the point at which this is true,
and then see if we actually do have a sign change in the
second derivative of that point, and only if you have a
sign change, then you can say it's an inflection point. So let's see if we can do that. So just because a second
derivative is 0, that by itself does not tell you
it's an inflection point. It has to have a second
derivative of 0, and when you go above or below that x, the
second derivative has to actually change signs. Only then. So we can say, if f prime
changes signs around x, then we can say that
x is an inflection. And if it's changing signs
around x, then it's definitely going to be 0 right at x, but
you have to actually see that if it's negative before x, has
to be positive after x,or if it's positive before x, has
to be negative after x. So let's test that out. So the first thing we
need to do is find these candidate points. Remember, the candidate
points are where the second derivative is equal to 0. We're going to find those
points, and then see if this is true, that the sign
actually changes. We want to find where this
thing over here is equal to 0. And once again, for this to
be equal to 0, the numerator has to be equal to 0. This denominator can never be
equal to 0 if we're dealing with real numbers, which I
think is a fair assumption. So let's see where this our
numerator can be equal to 0 for the second derivative. So let's set the numerator
of the second derivative. 27 times 12x squared minus 4x
to the sixth is equal to 0. Remember, that's just
the numerator of our second derivative. Any x that makes the
numerator 0 is making the second derivative 0. So let's factor
out a 4x squared. So 4x squared. Now we'll have 27 times, if we
factor 4 out of the 12, we'll just get a 3, and we factored
out the x squared, minus, we factored out the 4, we factored
out an x squared, so we have x to the fourth is equal to 0. So the x's that will make this
equal to 0 will satisfy either, I'll switch colors, either 4x
squared is equal to 0, or, now 27 times 3, I can do
that in my head. That's 81. 20 times 3 is 60, 7 times
3 is 21, 60 plus 21is 81. Or 81 minus x to the
fourth is equal to 0. Any x that satisfies either
of these will make this entire expression equal 0. Because if this thing is
0, the whole thing is going to be equal to 0. If this thing is 0, the
whole thing is going to be equal to 0. Let me be clear, this
is 81 right there. So let's solve this. This is going to be 0 when
x is equal to 0, itself. This is going to be equal
to 0 when x, let's see. If we add x to the fourth to
both sides, you get x to the fourth is equal to 81. If we take the square root of
both sides of this, you get x squared is equal to 9, or so
you get x is plus or minus 3. x is equal to plus
or minus three. So these are our candidate
inflection points, x is equal to 0, x is equal to plus 3,
or x is equal to minus 3. So what we have to do now, is
to see whether the second derivative changes signs around
these points in order to be able to label them
inflection points. So what happens when x
is slightly below 0? So let's take the situation,
let's do all the scenarios. What happens when x
is slightly below 0? Not all of them, necessarily,
but if x is like 0.1. What is the second derivative
going to be doing? If x is 0.1, or if x is minus
0.1, this term right here is going to be positive, and
then this is going to be 81 minus 0.1 to the fourth. So that's going to be a
very small number, right? So it's going to be some
positive number times 81 minus a small number. So it's going to be
a positive number. So when x is less than 0, or
just slightly less than 0, our second derivative is positive. Now what happens when
x is slightly larger? When I write this notation, I
want to be careful, I mean, really, just right below 0. Now when x is right
above 0, what happens? Let's say x was 0.01,
or 0.1, positive 0.1. Well, it's going to
be the same thing. Because in both cases,
we're squaring, and we're taking the fourth. So you're kind of losing
your sign information. So if x is 0.1, this thing
is going to be a small positive number. You're going to be subtracting
a very small positive number from 81, but 81 minus a small
number is still going to be positive. So you're going to positive
times a positive, so your second derivative is still
going to be greater than 0. So something interesting here. f at your second derivative is
0 when x is equal to 0, but it is a not an inflection point. Because notice, the concavity
did not change around 0. Our second derivative is
positive as we approach 0 from the left, and it's positive as
we approach 0 from the right. So in general, at 0, we're
always, as we're near 0 from either direction, we're going
to be concave upwards. So the fact that 0 is a
critical point, and that we're always concave upward, as we
approach 0 from either side, this tells us that this
is a minimum point. Because we're concave
upwards all around 0. So 0 is not an
inflection point. Let's see if positive
and negative 3 are inflection points. And if you study this
equation, let me write our and actually, I
just want to be clear. I've just been using
the numerator of the second derivative. The whole second derivative is
this thing right here, but I've been ignoring the denominator
because the denominator is always positive. So if we're trying to
understand whether things are positive or negative, we just
really have to determine whether the numerator is
positive or negative. Because this expression right
there is always positive. It's something to
the second power. So let's test whether we have a
change in concavity around x is equal to positive
or negative 3. So remember, the numerator of
our, let me just rewrite our second derivative, just so
you see it here. f prime prime of x. The numerator is this
thing right here. It's 4x squared times 81
minus x to the fourth. and the denominator
was up here, x to the fourth plus 27 squared. That was our second derivative. Let's see if this changes signs
around positive or negative 3. And actually, we should get the
same answer, because regardless of whether we put positive
or negative 3 here. you lose all your sign
information because you're taking it to the fourth
power, you're taking it to the second power. And obviously, anything to the
fourth power is always going to be positive, anything to the
second power is always going to be negative. So when we do our test, if it's
true for positive 3, it's probably going to be true
for negative 3 as well. But let's just try it out. So when x is just a little bit
less than positive 3, what's the sign of f prime prime of x? So it's going to be 4 times
9, or it's going to be 4 times a positive number. It might be like 2.999,
but this is still going to be positive. So this is going to be positive
when x is approaching 3, and then this is going to be, well,
if x is 3, this is 0, so x is a little bit less than 3. If x is a little bit less than
3, if it's like 2.9999, this number is going to be less
than 81, so this is also going to be positive. And of course, the denominator
is always positive. So as x is less than 3, is
approaching from the left, we are concave upwards. This thing's going
to be a positive. Then f prime prime
is greater than 0. We are upwards,
concave upwards. When x is just larger than
3, what's going to happen? Well, this first term is
still going to be positive. But if x is just larger than 3,
x to the fourth is going to be just larger than 81, and so
this second term is going to be negative in that situation. Let me do it ina new color. It's going to be negative
when x is larger than 3. Because this is going
to be larger than 81. So if this is negative and this
is positive, then the whole thing is going to be negative,
because this denominator is still going to be positive. So then f prime prime is going
to be less than 0, so we're going to be concave downwards. One last one. What happens when x is just
a greater than minus 3? So just being greater
than minus 3, that's like minus 2.99999. So when you take minus 2.99
square it, you're going to get a positive number, so this
is going to be positive. And if you take minus 2.99 to
the fourth, that's going to be a little bit less
than 81, right? Because 2.99 to the fourth is a
little bit less than 81, so this is still going
to be positive. So you have a positive times a
positive divided by a positive, so you're going to be concave
upwards, because your second derivative is going to
be greater than 0. Concave upwards. And then finally, when x is
just, just less than negative 3, remember, when I write this
down, I don't mean for all x's larger than negative 3,or all
x's smaller than negative 3. There's actually no, well, I
can't think of the notation that would say just, as we just
approach three in this case, from the left, but what happens
if we just go to minus 3.11? Or 3.01, I guess is a
better one, or 3.1? Well, this term right here
is going to be positive. But if we take minus 3.1 to the
fourth, that's going to be larger than positive 81, right? The sign will become positive,
it'll be larger than 81, so this'll become negative. So in that case as well, we'll
have a positive times a negative divided by a positive,
so then our second derivative is going to be negative. And so we're going
to be downwards. So I think we're ready to plot.
so first of all, is x plus or minus 3 inflection points? Sure! As we approach x is equal to 3
from the left, we are concave upwards, and then as we cross
3, the second derivative is 0. The second derivative's
0, I lost it up here. The second derivative is 0. And then, as we go to the
right of 3, we become concave downwards. So we got our sign change
in the second derivative. So x is equal to 3. So 3 is definitely an
inflection point, and the same argument could be
made for negative 3. We switch signs as we cross 3. So these definitely are
inflection points. Just so we get the exact
coordinates, let's figure out what f of 3 is, or f of
positive and negative 3. And then we're ready to graph. So first of all, we know that
f, we know that the point 0, 3.29, that this was a minimum. Because 0 was a critical
point, the slope is 0 there, and because it's concave
upwards all around 0. So 0 is definitely not
an inflection point. And then we know that the
points positive 3 and minus 3 are inflection points, and in
order to figure out their y-coordinates, we can
just evaluate them. So they're actually going to
have the same y-coordinates, because if you put a minus3 or
positive 3 and take it to the fourth power, you're going
to get the same thing. Let's figure out what they are. So if we take 3 to the fourth
power, that's what, 81. 81 plus 27 is equal to 108,
and then we want to take the natural log of it. Let's just say 4.7, just
to get a rough idea. That's4.7. And that's true of whether we
do positive or negative 3, because we took to
the fourth power. So it's 4.7, 4.7. These are both
inflection points. And we should be
ready to graph it! Let's graph it. All right. Let me draw my axis,
just like that. And this is my y-axis, this
is my x-axis, this is y. You can even call it the f
of x axis, if you like. This is x. And so the point 0, 3.29. Let's say this is 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, to the point 0, 3.29. That's 0, 1, 2, 3, a little bit
above 3, it's right there. That's the minimum point. And then we're concave. The slope is 0 right there, we
figured that out, because the first derivative was 0 there. So it's a critical
point, and it's concave upwards around there. So that told us we arepoint at
a minimum point, right there. And then at positive 3. So 1, 2, 3. At positive 3, 4.7. So 4.7 will look
something like that. We have an inflection point. Before that, we're concave
upwards, and then after that we're concave downwards. So it looks something
like this. So we're concave upwards
up with up to that point. Maybe, actually, you should,
let me ignore that yellow thing I drew before. Let me get rid of that. Let me draw it like 1, 2, 3. 3, 4.7 looks like that, and
minus 3, 4.7, 1, 2, 3, 4.7 looks like that. So we know at 0, we are slope
of 0 and we're concave upwards, so we look like this. We're concave upwards,
until x is equal to 3. And at x is equal to 3, we
become concave downwards, and we go, let me try my best to
draw it well, and we go off like that. And then we're concave upwards
around 0, until we get, we're concave upwards as long as x is
greater than minus 3, and then at minus 3 we become
concave downwards again. Maybe I should do
it in that color. This concave downwards right
here, that's this, right here. That's that, right there. And this concave downwards,
right here sorry, I meant to do it in the red color
this concave downwards right here, is this, right there. And then the concave upwards
around 0 is right there. You could even imagine, this
concave upwards that we measured, that's this, concave
upwards, and then this concave upwards is that. And then around 0,
we're always upwards. So this is my sense of what the
graph will look like and maybe it'll just you know it turns
into well you could think about what it does is x approaches
positive or negative infinity, some of the terms, well,
I won't go into that. But let's test whether we've
grafted correctly using a graphing calculator. So let me get out my TI-85,
trusty TI-85, and let's graph this sucker. All right, press graph. y equals the natural log of
x to the fourth plus 27. All right, I want to
hit that graph there. So I do second, graph. And let's cross our fingers. It looks pretty good! It looks almost exactly
like what we drew. So I think our I think our
mathematics was correct. This was actually
very satisfying. So hopefully you appreciate the
usefulness of inflection points, and second derivative,
and first derivative, in graphing some of
these functions. 

Transcript for: Graphing with Calculus
Let's do another problem where
we graph a function based on the properties of
its derivatives and second derivative. And what's especially
interesting about this problem I think is the fact they
don't give the function. They just give a bunch of
clues about the function. So what do they tell us? Well they tell us that
f of 0 is equal to 3. They also tell us that at
f of 3 is equal to 0. They tell us that f
of 6 is equal to 4. What I like about this problem
is that you can't use a calculator to solve it because
you don't know the function. So even if I give you a graphic
calculator you'd be helpless. Let's write out all the
information then we can plot it out. Let me write all the
derivative information here. They tell us that f prime
so the derivative of x is less than 0 on the
open interval 0 comma 3. So that means not
including 0 and 3. And they also tell us that the
derivative of is greater than 0 on the open interval
from 3 comma 6. So we can already guess that
if we're less than 0 as we approach 3 and we're greater
than 0 as we go away from 3, that the derivative
must be 0 at 3. That's the intuition. Although they don't tell us
that for sure, but I'm assuming that this function is
continuous and differentiable over all the intervals, because
the don't tell us otherwise. OK. So that's the information
to tell us about the first derivative. And what do they tell us
about the second derivative? They tell us that the second
derivative is greater than 0 on the interval 0 to 5. I did the open
interval from 0 to 5. So that means it's
concave upwards there. And they also tell us that the
second derivative is less than 0, so it's concave downwards on
the open interval from five to 6. You know they don't give
us information what happens after 6. Maybe it goes to an
inflection point. We don't know. So maybe you know, we'll just
assume that is doesn't change. So what does all this
information tell us? Well first let's just graph it. So f of 0 is 3, so we
have to graph the point 0,3 3,0 and 6,4. It seems like all of the action
is in the first quadrant, so I'll graph it accordingly. So let me graph it. I want to focus on the first
quadrant, so that's my x-axis. That's my y-axis. I have to go to 6,4. I want to draw this point
6,4, so 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. So that's the point 6,4. And let's see. 3 comma 0. So that's 1, 2, 3, so that's
this point right here. That point right
there is 3 comma 0. I got that from
this information. And then we have the
point 0 comma 3. 0, 1, 2, 3. So this is 0,3. Well, those are definitely
points on the function. That's what this tells us. And what do they tell us? They tell us that the
derivative is less than 0 on the interval from 0 to 3. From here to here the
derivative is less than 0. And that makes sense, because
we have to obviously decrease to go from this value
to this value. But what it does tell us is
that the function does not do something like this. The function does not do this. The function does not do that. And how do we know that? Well because if the function
moved up and then down, then you have a positive slope
here, which this says is not possible. The derivative is less than 0
from this interval to this interval, so the slope has to
be negative the entire time. And then it tells us that the
slope is positive from this interval from x is equal
to 3 to x is equal to 6, that's what this tells us. And so you know the line has to
look something like that, or like that, but can't curve down
then go up, because if it curved down you'd have a
negative slope at some point. So OK, fair enough. Essentially the graph is
monotonic from this point to this point and this
point to this point. And if you want to get
technical, the monotonicity theorem tells us that, well
then this must be a point either that is a point where
the derivative is 0, or it must be a point where there is no
derivative, but I'm assuming that this graph is
differentiable over everything. And you know you didn't need
a theorem to tell you that. We know that the slope is
less than 0 as we approach here in this interval. We know the slope is greater
than 0 in this interval. And if we assume that the
derivative is continuous, which I will make that assumption
although they haven't told us, but in the absence of that
information, why not. If the derivative is always
kind of incrementing or decrementing at a continues
rate, the derivative must be 0 at this point, because it's
less than 0 here and greater than 0 here. I'll draw a little horizontal
line to indicate that the derivative is 0 there. So a it's going to be a bit
of a minimum point I think. And then let's move on to the
information on the second derivatives and see what
they're telling us. Well they're saying that the
second derivative is greater than 0 from 0 to 5. So from 0 to 5. So this is 5 right here. What does this tells? This means that we are
concave upwards from 0 to 5. That gives us a lot
of information. So that tells us that not only
are we monotonically decreasing as we approach 3, but
we're concave upwards. And and why is this
concave upwards? Well as you see the
slope here is negative. It's a little less
negative here. It's even less negative here
and then as it slowly approaches 0 it gets less and
less negative, and then it keeps increasing
until you get to 5. And then from 5 to
6 what happens? The second derivative becomes
negative, so we enter a point that is concave downwards. So from 5 to 6 I don't know
what the value of the function is it 5 but from 5 to 6 the
function becomes concave downwards from x equals
5 to x equals 6. We don't know what f of 5 is,
but f of 5 they didn't tell us is an inflection point. That's where we went from
going concave upwards to concave downwards. And I think that's all we
can do with this graph. We don't know what happens. I mean actually we made a
couple of assumptions anyway, that the graph is continuous
and differentiable over the whole thing. But I think this will give you
an intuition on what all of this first and second
derivative and all this stuff does for us. And just so you know, this
is an inflection point. they could have told us that f
prime prime of 5 is equal to 0. We don't know that for sure,
but I'm just assuming. Anyway hope you found
that vaguely useful. Actually since I have time,
let me do one more bonus problem that I was sent. And it was written right after
that problem so why not do it. And it says prove that
a quadratic function has no inflections. So what does a quadratic
function look like? f of x is equal to ax
squared plus bx plus c. And it says prove that this
has no inflection point. Well, what's an
inflection point? It's a point where the second
derivative is equal to 0. So let's figure out what
the second derivative is. The first derivative of this
quadratic but any quadratic can be written like
this is 2ax plus b. And what's the
second derivative? Well that's just equal to 2a. Now an inflection point
is when the second derivative is equal to 0. Now my question to you is, can
this function ever equal 0? Well, the only way that this
function would equal 0 is for some reason a was 0, but if a
was 0 then it wouldn't be a quadratic, because then this
term wouldn't exist, it would be bx plus c and
it would be just a line. So if we're talking about a
quadratic where this a coefficient is non 0, which it
has to be because that's the coefficient of the term x,
there's no way that this function, this
expression, is non 0. So there's no way that the
second derivative can ever be 0, and thus we have proved
that a quadratic has no point of inflection. see you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Optimization with Calculus 1
Let's use what we've learned
about finding the minimums and maximums of functions to solve
some optimization problems. And you might be wondering,
Sal, what is an optimization problem. And my reply to you is well,
the problems we're about to do are optimization problems, and
I think you'll understand why they're called
optimization problems. Anyway so the first problem
is find two numbers whose product is a negative 16. So the product is
equal to minus 16. And it says, and the sum of
whose squares is a minimum. So sum of squares is minimum. So if you haven't figured out
yet, these optimization problems all impose some type
of constraints, and then say, for what numbers do we get a
maximum value or minimum value. So let's do this problem, and
then we'll do a couple of more. So two numbers whose product
is negative 16 and the sum of their squares is minimum. So call those two
numbers x and y. So their product is minus
16, so we know that x times y is equal to minus 16. And then what's the
sum of their squares. Let's just say the some
of squares, so I'll just call that s. The sum of their squares
is going to be equal to x squared plus y squared. And so this is the function
that we want to optimize. And in this case we want to
find the minimum value. So how do we do this problem? Well the first thing we want to
do, we want to minimize this function, but right now it's a
function of two variables, and we haven't done
multivariable calculus yet. So it would be easier if we
could express this as a function of one variable, and
then we could optimize it with respect that variable, and we
could substitute backwards et cetera, et cetera. So how can we write the
sum of the squares as a function of one variable? Well that's where this
equation comes in handy. We could substitute
either for x or y. Let's just substitute y, so we
could rewrite this equation dividing both sides by x as y
is equal to minus 16 over x. I just divided both
sides of this by x. If we take this and substitute
it here, we get the sum of the squares of the two numbers
is going to be equal to x squared plus y squared. Well y is this, so what's
this thing squared? Minus 16 squared is
256 over x squared. So that's the sum of the
squares of the two numbers. And so how do we learn to find
minimums or maximums, or in general optimize the function? Well in general, a function
hits a minimum or maximum point, especially a local
minimum or maximum point, when it's derivative is 0. So let's take the derivative of
this and set it equal to 0, and hopefully we find
a minimum point. And then we'll later show that
it really is a minimum point. So let's take the derivative
of this with respect to x. I'll just write s prime. We could have written ds
dx, but save on notation. Save on my electronic ink. So s prime is equal to so
there's a slope of this function at any time, at any
x 2x plus this is the same thing as 256 times
x to the negative 2. So what will be the derivative? The derivative is
going to be 256. We multiply times exponent
which is minus 2, and then we decrement the exponent by 1 ,
so we get x to the minus 3. So the derivative is equal to
2x plus no, not plus 2x minus 512 times x
to the minus 3. And we want to find a local
minimum or maximum, or maybe a global one. So we want to figure out where
the slope is equal to 0, so this is the slope, so let's
set this equal to 0. So we get 2x minus 512x to
the minus 3 is equal to 0. Let's see, we can manipulate
that around a little bit. We get 2x let me do it
in a different color, I'm tired of the yellow. So you get going up here, we
get just let's add 512 to both sides so we get 2x is
equal to 512x to the minus 3, right, I just added
512 to both sides. Now let's multiply both sides
of this equation times x to the third, just to get rid of this. So if we multiply both sides
of this equation by x to the third, we get 2x to the
fourth is equal to 512. Right, x to the third
times x to the minus 3, that just equals 1. Divide both sides of this
by 2, you get x to the fourth is equal to 256. And if it's not immediately
clear what this is you know, x is going to be the fourth
root of 256 if you don't know that immediately, you can
think, well, what's the square root of 256. Well it's 16. And then what's the
square root of that. Well the square root of
16 is plus or minus. So the square root of this is
plus or minus 16, but then a square root of at least a
plus 16 is plus or minus 4. So this x is equal
to plus or minus 4. If you don't believe me, take
either minus 4 or positive 4 and take it to the fourth
power and you will get 256. So if x is plus or
minus 4, what is y? Well we just know that y
is minus 16 divided by x, so we could get x is 4. If x is 4, then what is y? It's minus 16 divided by 4,
then y is equal to minus 4. And of course if x was minus 4,
then y is minus 16 divided by minus 4, y would be equal to 4. So it actually doesn't
matter which one we take. The two numbers are
4 and negative 4. It doesn't matter what
we call them, x or y. The two numbers are
4 and minus 4. And we are actually
done the problem. These are the two numbers where
the sum of the squares well actually, no we, are not done. We know that we've reached some
type of minimum or maximum point here, and since they ask
for minimum, and this was the only point that we found where
the slope was 0, we probably solved the problem. But let's prove to ourselves
that we're really at a minimum point on this function
when x is equal to 4. And how do we do that? Well, we can take the second
derivative of this function, see what the second derivative
is at x equals 4, and then see if we're concave upwards
or concave downwards. This is the first derivative. What is the second derivative? s prime prime is equal to 2,
and then minus 3 times minus 512, so that's plus,
and what is that? 1,536 Right, plus 1,536
times x to the minus 4. I actually you know should be
writing s as a function of x. I shouldn't be lazy
with my notation. These are all the function of
x, but you get the point. So what is s prime prime
when x is equal to 4? Well it's equal
to 2 plus 1,536. And then what's 4 to
the minus 4 power? We get 1/256. And we don't even have
to calculate this. All we care about is this
value positive or negative. It And it's clearly positive. We have a positive number plus
a positive number divided by a positive number. So we have a positive
number here. So what do we know? We know at the point x is equal
to 4, this function here our sum of squares function is
concave upwards, and we know that because the second
derivative at x is equal to 4 is positive. And what does concave
upwards look like? Concave upwards
looks like this. And so x equals 4 is there, and
so we are at a minimum point. And so we know that the sum
of squares are minimum. And if you really want to make
sure that you're not missing something or we haven't done
this wrong, just play around, think of other numbers whose
product is minus 16 and figure out their sum of squares. And I can pretty much guarantee
you that it will be larger than the sum of the squares
of 4 of minus 4 and 4. So actually, what are they? What is s of 4? What is the sum of squares
of 4 and minus 4? It's 4 squared is
16 plus 16 is 32. That's the sum. So let's try some
other numbers. What is the sum of 1 squared
plus minus 16 squared. Those two have the product
minus 16, 1 and minus 16, that is equal to what? 257. Much higher number. You could try negative 8 and
2, or negative 2 and 8, and everything you'll find will
have a higher sum of squares than 4 and minus 4. Anyway. I was actually planning on
doing three problems in this video, but I'm reaching the 10
minute limit so I will finish this video now, and I will
do two more of these optimization problems. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Optimization with Calculus 2
This next problem is a bit of
a classic and I've actually gotten multiple requests to do
some variation of this problem. So it says find the volume of
the largest open box It can be made from a piece of
cardboard 24 inches square. So let me draw my
piece of cardboard. I don't want to
draw it filled in. So my piece of cardboard
is going to be a square. I'll draw it pretty big,
because I want you to visualize it. And it's 24, what did they say? 24 inches square. So it is 24 by 24 square
by cutting equal squares from the corners and
turning up the sides. So what are they saying? Well, they're saying
we're going to cut equal squares from the corner. So let's say we cut let me
see if I can draw this well so I'm going to cut a square
here, and I'm going to cut an equal size square there draw
this neatly and then cut an equal size square there,
and then cut an equal size square there. So I'm going to cut out those
corners and then I'm going to fold up the sides. Just so you can visualize it,
so those dotted lines are where I would actually fold the box,
and then I would end up with an open box. And let's see what the
dimensions would be. And that's actually what the
whole crux of the problem is. So how big of a squares should
I cut out in order to maximize the volume up the box? Well, these are equal sided
squares that I'm cutting out, so let's say
that each side is x. So if this x, then this x, this
is x, this is x, this is x, this is x, this is x,
this is x, this is x. And then what is going to be
the volume of our box when we fold up everything? Let me see, so I'll
draw the base. So this dotted square
right here, that's going to be the base. I'll draw it at an angle. That's the base. And what are the
dimensions of the base? Well, this base is going to be
the length of this side of the cardboard minus this x
minus this x, right? So this base right here, that
is going to be 24 minus 2x. It's just the whole length
minus this minus that; that's how long that is. And of course, this is going to
be the same length, this is going to be the same length. All of these sides of the
base are 24 minus 2x. And then this side is
also 24 minus 2x. And then what is going to
be the height of this open box that we're creating? Let me draw the sides of it. It's open, which means it
doesn't have a top to it. So we have an opening here,
so you can kind of see the inside of the box. And what is this height? Well, when you fold these
flaps up the height is x. If you can think about it
here this is really just a bit of visualization this side
right here, that you can view as this thing right here. I can even do it in a
different color for you. You can view this side,
this front facing side as this right here. I'll just do a couple; you
I don't have to do all of the side, I don't think. You could view this side
as this side right here. Right? It's folded up. And then this backside is this
backside, and that side there is that and this is the base. Anyway, so that is the volume
of our open box and we want to maximize it. How do we do that? Let's write the volume as a
function of x and then take its derivative, figure out where
the derivative is 0, and hope that that's a maximum point and
we'll prove it by taking the second derivative and seeing. Now we actually want it to be
concave downwards because concave downwards looks
like that, that means you found a maximum point. So we know that the volume as a
function of x I like writing the big v's the volume of the
function of x is that side times you know, you could
view it as depth times length times height. So it's x, the height, times
the depth, 24 minus 2x, times the width, 24 minus 2x. Now let's see if I can
multiply this out. It's probably the hardest
part about this problem. So x times what's
24 times 24? I want to say it's actually
kind of sad, but I've made so many careless mistakes
recently that I don't want to make any more. I want to get the right number. For 4 times 4 is 16. 4 times 2 is 8, 96. 0. 2 times 24 is 48, 6. 9 plus 8 is 17. 576: that's what I
thought it was. I should have memorized my
times tables up to 25. But anyway, 24 times 24 is 576. And then we'll have 2 times 24,
so that's 48 x, but we have them twice so it's minus 96x. Because minus 2x times 24 and
then minus 2x times 24, so that's 48 to plus
48, so minus 96x. And then finally the last
two: plus 4x squared. And now we can multiply the x's
out and we get the volume of the open box is let me put
the x term first 4x to the third I'm just multiplying
this out minus 96x squared plus 576x. Let me erase this. I should have been able
to do that in my head. Anyway, I'm not too proud to
show that I didn't know that. Let's see, so let
me erase that. And so what do we want to do? We want to take the derivative
of this, figure out at what x values do we have a 0 slope,
and then test to see if those were maximum or minimum points. If we have a maximum point at
that x value, and if it's a global maximum, that we have
found the x value that optimizes the volume. You might want to graph these
and experiment with them and get a more intuitive
sense of it. But that's really what we did
when we found minima and maxima, and we did concave
upwards and downwards and all of that. Anyway, the derivative v prime
of x is equal to 12x squared this part is the fun part 12x
squared minus 192x plus 576. That says 576. I know it's hard to read;
it's hard to read for me. So let's figure out
where this equals 0. So we want to know where
12x squared minus 192x plus 576 is equal 0. And the easiest thing to do
here is just divide the whole thing by 12, both sides. Because when you divide 0
by 12 you still get 0. So you get x squared minus
what's 192 divided by 12? Well, 192 was 24 times 4. Is that right? 24? No, 24 times 16 is 192. I've been making so many
careless mistakes. 12 goes into 192, 1. 12, 72. All right. 16. I should have been
able to do that. Anyway, minus 16x plus well,
this was 24 times 24, so this should be 12 times 48. So this should be plus
48 is equal to 0. And we could write 24
times 24 is 5 plus 76. So 12 times 48. Right. So now we just have
to factor this. So what two numbers that when I
add them I get minus 16 and then when I multiply them
I get 48, positive 48? Let's see 6 times I want
to make sure I did this; so 12 goes into 72 six times. I just want to make sure I
have the numbers right. As you can tell, I don't do
these problems ahead of time, because I want you see that I
go through the pain as you do. So let me make sure. I have 12 goes into
576 four times. 48, and you get 96. 12 goes into right. 48 times, 12 goes into that. I shouldn't have had to do
that, but I've been making so many careless mistakes. I haven't eaten dinner yet. So anyway, maybe I'm just
missing the easy factor, right? Because I have, what numbers
you get 12 times oh, actually I just figured it out. 12 times 4. Sometimes when your brain
is in calculus mode, the algebra II gets difficult. So this is the same thing
as x minus 4 times x minus 12 is equal to 0. So at x is equal to 4 we're at
some type of minima or maxima where it's some critical point. And x is equal to 12. And let me tell you something:
we don't even have to look at the secondary derivative here. What happens when
x is equal to 12? What will happen to the
volume of the box? If x is equal to 12, what is
the length of this base? It's 0. Because the length of the
base is 24 minus 2x. So this would be 0,
this would be 0. So this is the point where we
have a volume of 0, so you know that this is going
to be a minimum point. And if you want to verify it,
take the second derivative of the volume and evaluate the
second derivative of the volume at 12 and you will realize that
we are concave upwards and that x equals twelve is
the minimum point. So you already know, in
all probability, the answer is x equals 4. And if you really wanted to
verify it, you can take the second derivative, add x equals
4, and make sure that we are concave downwards
at that point. Because if we want a maximum
point, we want to be some place where the graph
looks something like that. So we're at a maximum point. So what's the
second derivative? v prime prime of x is
equal to 24x minus 192. And what's 24 times 4? It's 96, right? So v prime prime of
4 is equal to 96. Right? 4 times 24 minus 192,
which equals minus 96. So the second derivative at
this point is negative, which means that we are concave
downwards, which means that this is a maximum point. And once again, I challenge you
to find another value of x where you get a larger value. And just to get an intuition,
how large will this box be? Well, if x is 4, then
each side is 24 minus 8. This would be 16 by 16 by 4. So that would be the optimal
volume for that box. Hope you found that useful, and
I will see you in the next video where I will do another
optimization problem, and this one is especially fun. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Optimization with Calculus 3
This next optimization problem
that I've been sent seems fun. I've actually never seen this
problem before, and so I'm even more excited to do it. So it says, a wire of
length 100 centimeters is cut into two pieces. Let me draw this wire. So that's our wire, and it's
going to be cut into 2 pieces. Let me read the whole thing
before I draw anything. One is bent to form a square,
and the other is bent to form an equilateral triangle. Where should the cut be made if
A, the sum of the two areas is to be a minimum or a maximum? And it says, allow the
possibility of no cut. Fascinating. So this is a 100
centimeters long. Doesn't matter if it's
centimeters or meters or whatever, right? So it's 100 long. Could be 100 miles long. And we're going to cut
it at some point. We'll cut it there. Well, I shouldn't have
done that, because I was going to use x and y. But actually, let's use a
and b, since I made the cut look like an x. So let's say that that is a
centimeters from the left hand side of the wire. And then what is the distance
from the right hand side of the wire? I could call it b, but even
easier would be to say, if this is a, then this is
going to be 100 minus a. And they say, I'm going to take
one of the wires, let me just say the left hand wire, and I'm
going to take it into, and I'm going to form a square. Which is not a rectangle. A square. And then the other wire
is going to form an equilateral triangle. OK. So let's do it. And actually, I can already
sense that it'll be easier to manipulate this one. So I'm going to make the
equilateral triangle out of this side, and make the square
out of the side, just because I have a sense it will make
the math a little easier. So I'm going to take this wire
of length a and form an equilateral triangle
out of it, right? What is the triangle
going to look like? It's going to look like, and
I'm going to arbitrarily switch colors now. So this is my
equilateral triangle. All the sides are equal. And how long are each of
the sides going to be? Well, the whole perimeter
is a, so each of these have to be a/3. And then I also have a
square with the leftovers. I'm not using the the square
tool so I have it, I should use it. Oh, I don't want to
do it like that. OK, so there's my square. And if the whole perimeter
is 100 minus a, what is the length of each side? It's going to be this
divided by 4, right? Because all the
sides are equal. So what's this length
divided by 4? 100 minus a divided by 4
is 25 minus a/4, right? So this side is 25 minus a/4,
this side is 25 minus a/4, and this is the same thing, 25
minus a/4, and this is 25 minus a/4. And they want us to find what
value of a, they say, the sum of the 2 areas, right? They want to know what value of
a minimizes the sum of the 2 areas and maximize the
sum of the 2 areas. So what are the sum
of the 2 areas? What's the are of
this triangle? I always forget the formula for
the area of an equilateral triangle, so we'll have to
kind of derive it right now. So what I do, is I always draw
something like that, and then we know that this length
right here is a/6. I'm just doing the
halfway point. The whole thing is a/3. And this is a 30-60-90
triangle, right? That's 30, this is 60, so
this is going to be square root of 3 times this. So the height, let me do
that here, just so you know what I'm doing. This is a some geometry I'm
drawing half the triangle. This would be a/6. That's a/3. And so this would be square
root of 3 times this. So square root of
3 over 6 times a. So what's the area? Well, the area of this half
triangle, is base times height times 1/2. So the area of the whole
triangle is just going to be this base times this height. So the area of the triangle
is equal to this base times that height. So its area over 6, that's
this, times the height, times square root of 3 over 6, area. And just so you remember,
area of a triangle is 1/2 base times height. So if we did 1/2 base times
height, we would get the area of this triangle, right? But the area of the
entire triangle is 2 of these triangles. And so that's why I
got rid of the 1/2. Because it's 2 times
1/2 base times height. Hopefully that
doesn't confuse you. It's just a little
bit of geometry. Anyway, the area of the
triangle is equal to the square root of 3 over 36 a squared. And what's the area
of the square? That's easier. That's just base times height. So area of the square is
equal to 25 minus a over 4, that's just base
times height, squared. And that is equal to 625
minus 2 times so it's 20, let's see, 25 over
4 minus 50 over 4 a? Right. Minus 50 over 4a, plus
a squared over 16. So that's the area
of the square. But we want to know the
combined area of both of them. So what's the function
for the combined area? So the combined area, and I'll
do it in a bold color, area of both of them, I'll say area
combined, that's equal to the area of the square plus
the area of the triangle. So the area of the
square is, let's see. It's a squared over 16 minus 50
over 4 a plus 625, and we want to add the area of the
triangle, plus square root of 3 over 36 a squared. And that's a function of a. We could it put it like that. So now we have to optimize it. And we want to find the
minimum point and the maximum point, if they exist. Let me clear up some space. The area of the square is
already implicitly there. I could actually clear
up all of this here. And so what is the derivative? a prime, the combined
actually, I hope you don't mind, I'm going
to erase that too. Because I think I'm going to
run out of space and just get all bunched up, otherwise. That's not what I wanted to do. But you know we're
talking about. We already have figured out the
area the combined entities. So now it's just pure calculus. All the geometry is done. So what is the derivative of
the combined areas as a function of a is equal to the
derivative of this expression? So it's 2 times 16,
2/16, so it's a over 8. So let me write this. a over 8, let me draw a
line here, I don't want things to get confused. a over 8 minus 50/4, this
derivative 625 is just zero, plus 2 over square root
of 3 over 18 a, right? And so we want to find the
minimum, or the maximum, values for this. So let's set this
equation as equal to 0. So we get, let me
see what we can do. We could add the
a coefficients. So we have 1/8 plus square root
of 3 over 18 a, right, I just added that to that, minus 50/4. And we want to set this
derivative equal to zero. So let me switch
colors arbitrarily. And so we get, let me add these
two fractions, so 8 and 18. What's their common
denominator? 8 and 9. 8 times 9, is it 72? And 1/8 is the same
thing as 9/72. And so 18 goes into 72 4 times,
so that's plus 4 square roots of 3, and all that times
a is equal to 50/4. And now we can multiply both
sides times the reciprocal of this coefficient, and we get
maybe I made a careless mistake, but the numbers
aren't coming out too clean. But maybe they're not meant to. a is equal to 50/4
times 72 over 9 plus 4 square roots of 3. Let's see if we can
cancel anything out. This 4 becomes, this becomes an
18, and so we get a is equal to 50 times 18 divided by 9
plus 4 square roots of 3. Now let's see if that
makes any kind of sense. And I think I'm going
to have to get the calculator for this one. So what should I do first? Let me figure out what the
denominator's value is. so 3 square root times 4 equals
plus 9 is equal to 15.928. So that a is equal to,
what's 50 times 18, 550, 50, 90, right? 5 times 8 is 40, right? So that's 900 over 15.928,
so let me do that, let me just invert that. Times 900. It equals 56.5. So a is equal to 56.5. So at least we got a
number that makes sense. It would have been unfortunate
if the point that we have to cut this wire was some number
larger, or God forbid we had a negative number there. But we actually got a positive
number, and it's a number between 0 and 100. So we are probably right. But the question is, is this
a minimum value, or is this a maximum value? And to figure that out, well,
let's see if we're concave upwards or downwards
at this point. So let's think about it. Let's take the second
derivative of our combined area function. So this was our combined
area function. We had set it equal to 0. Let's take the second
derivative of that. Well that just equals, the
derivative of this equals, 1/8 plus square root of 3 over 18,
well, times a, but that just [? switches ?] coefficient, and then
that goes to 0. So that equals a prime
prime as a function of a. The combined areas
are a function of a. It's just a constant number,
and it is a positive constant number. So what does that tell us,
given that that is a positive constant Number That tells us
that at any value of a, the second derivative is positive. The second derivative is
positive tells us that we are concave upwards, really over
this whole combined area function, we're
concave upwards. And how do we know that? Well, the [UNINTELLIGIBLE] is positive, the slope is
always increasing, right? And that tells us that any
value where the slope a 0, which was this one, is
actually a minimum point. So a is equal to 56.5. So if we cut it at 56.5, we are
actually at a minimum point. So how would we maximize
the combined value? Well, maybe here, we have
to just take one of the boundary conditions. So maybe we could set a as
equal to 0, or we could set a as equal to 100, and figure out
what the values are, and one of those have to be
our maximum value. So what happens when
a is equal to zero? So this was our function
to begin with. What is our combined area
function, if a is 0? Well, this is 0, this is 0,
that is 0, so it equals 625. And what does that
translate into? That's the case where the
entire wire is used to make a square, and none of the wire
is used to make a triangle. In that situation, our combined
area, and all the area coming from the square, would be 625. Well, what happens when
a is equal to 100? Well then, if this is equal
to 100, then the area of the square is 0. So we can actually even
ignore these terms. We actually know that this will
evaluate to 0, because we are committing no wire
to the square. And so what is the
area of the triangle? Well, this term right here was
the area of the triangle, so it equaled the square root of 3
over 36 times 100 squared. So what is that? Let's see if we can do that. So 3 square root divided by
36 is equal to, and then 100 squared is 10,000, right? So times 110, 1, 2, 3. 481. It equals 481. So what do we know? We know that if we cut it
exactly at 56.5, and actually there's a little bit more
precision that I didn't pay attention to, if we cut it at
roughly 56.5, the combined area, actually we haven't even
figured out what that combined area is, but we know it's a
minimum point, because we're concave upward at that point. And as a fun exercise for you,
you might want to plug it into your calculator, and figure out
what the actual area is for that point, and realize
it is the low point. So that is the minimum value. That's how we minimize the area
of the square or the triangle. Now, if we committed all the
wire to the square, we get an area of 625, and all of
it comes to the square. If we cut it here, so all of
the wire is used to make the triangle, we get area of 481. So the maximum value is when a
is equal to 0, and our combined area is 625, because we're
doing a square with the whole wire, and the minimum value is
when we actually cut it right there at 56.5. So where we commit to 56.5 to
the triangle, and we commit, you know, the remainder, so
what is that, 43.5 to the square. That's when we minimize it. That was that frankly a
fascinating problem, and I hope I got the problem right, and
even if I made a careless mistake, I think you understand
how to do the problem. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Optimization  Example 4
I've been sent another
maximization or minimization problem, and this seemed to be
an interesting twist on what we've already done, so
let's do this one. Let's see. A rectangular storage container
with an open top is to have a volume of 10 meters cubed. The length of its base
is twice its width. Let me start drawing
this thing. It's a rectangular storage
container with an open top. So let's see, let me do
it a different color. OK, so I'll do it over here. So that's its base. So let's see. The length of its base
is twice its width. So this is the base, and if
I call this the width, so this is x, the length is
twice that, this is 2x. The length of its base is
twice the width, right? So this is the length of the
base, this is the width. OK? Material and then the height,
for now, is unknown. I think we should be able to
find a constraint on this, because we know what the
volume has to be, right? It says, materials for
the sides of cost $6 per square meter. Find the cost of materials for
the cheapest such container. OK, so let's do a
couple things. First, let's figure out what
the height is in terms of x, and then we can find an
equation for the cost in terms of x, and then take the
derivatives, and find the minimum, et cetera, et cetera. So what do we know about this? What's the volume of this box? The volume of this box is
equal to the, what did I say, this is the length, but
it doesn't really matter. Length times the width
times the height. So it's 2x times x,
2x squared times h. So it's 2x squared
times h, right? Base times height times
width, whatever. Length times width
times height. Just the volume of a rectangle. And they already said that the
volume is 10 meters cubed, so that gives us a
good constraint. So that has to equal 10. Let's divide both sides by 2x
squared, and so what do we get? If we take this equation, we
divide both sides by 2x squared, we get h is equal to
10 over 2x squared, which is equal to, we could say,
5x to the minus 2 power. So this is, so we could
write this as 5x to the minus 2 power. That is h. We have just solved that. We were able to solve that
because they gave us constraint on the volume of the box. Fair enough. So now let's see what the cost
of the material, the total cost of the material,
is going to be. So I'll do that in magenta. The cost of the material. And I can even say,
as a function of x. is equal to what? OK. Material for the sides
costs $6 per square meter. So what is the surface
area of the sides? Oh no, they tell the material
for the base first. So material for the base
costs $10 per square meter. So this base right here,
the material costs $10 per square meter. So what is the
cost of the base? It's going to be area
of the base times 10. So it's 10 times the
area of the base. What's the area of the base? It's 2x times x. So it's 2x squared. So this is the cost of the
material on the base. And now we want to add the cost
of the material on the sides. So. And this is where gets a
little bit interesting. So there's two sides that
are x, this side and this side are the same size. Right? And so what are they? What are their areas? So it's going to be $6 per
square meter for those two sides, right? For this green side, and that
one back there, as well. I don't want to make
this too messy. So $6. And what's the area? And there's 2 of these
sides, I'm going to multiply them by 2. And so what's the area
of each of these sides? It's x times 5x minus 2. So that's 5x minus 1. All right? So now we have to figure
out this side here and that side over there. And let me do it in
a brown, maybe. So now we care about this
side up in front, and then that side back there. But that's also going
to cost $6, right? So plus $6 per square meter. And then there's two sides,
and then what is it? It's 2x times 5x to
the negative 2. So that's 10, right, 2 times
5 is 10, x times, x to the negative 2, x to
the negative 1. Let's simplify this. So we have the cost, and it
said it was an open top, so there's no there's no fabric
we need for the top. So the cost of putting the
fabric, or the material, on this on this open rectangle,
is, see, 20x squared plus, what's this, 12 times 5 is 60x
to the minus 1, plus, let's see, 12 times 10, 120x to the
minus one, and so we can further simplify that as 20 x
squared plus 180 x to the minus 1 power. And now we're ready to just
take the derivative and find out what the minimum
point is of this curve. So let's do that. So c prime of x, and this is
a fun, non-hairy derivative. So it's 40, 2 times 20
x and then minus 180 x to the minus 2. And the minimum or maximum
point are going to be where this is equal to 0, so
let's set that equal to 0. Let me clear up some space. I think you understand
all of this, so let me get rid of that. Actually, I like the drawing,
but it's got to go, because I need the room. If you need to review it,
just rewind the video. OK. So we want to set the
derivative, to find the minimum or maximum point, at minimum or
maximum point on the curve, the slope is 0, so the
derivative is 0. So let's figure that out. So 40x minus 180 x to the
minus 2 is equal to 0. And the first thing I would do
is just, you could divide both sides by 20, and you get 2x
minus 9x minus 2 is equal to 0 divided by 20, which is 0. And then, let's
see what you get. If you add 9x to the minus 2 to
both sides, you get 2x is equal to 9x to the minus 2, or
9 over x squared, right? That's the same thing
is 9x to the minus 2. Now, I don't know, let's
multiply both sides of this equation by x squared, so you
get 2x to the third is equal to 9, or x to the third is equal
to 9/2, or x is equal to the cube root, or we could just
say 9/2 to the 1/3 power, whatever that could be. 4.5 to the 1/3 power. And do we know that this is a
minimum or a maximum point? Well, we could go and take the
second derivative, and then confirm that we're concave
upwards at this point, and then we would know that we are at a
minimum point, and this is the cheapest such container. But I'll tell you a
little, you know. If you see this in a class, or
maybe you want to prove that for yourself on a test, but an
easy way to test that is just, try some other x, right? We have the cost
function right here. Try some other x. And you know that this is
either going to be a maximum or a minimum, or at least a local
maximum or minimum, or if you try another x and if it's
greater, then you have a minimum. Or the other thing is, well,
you know, if there's only one critical point, and they ask
you to find the cheapest container, that critical
point is probably going to be the minimum point. But anyway. So just for fun, let's
figure out what that is actually equal to. I'll actually go to
google.com, and let's see. We could just say, we want
9/2 to the 1/3 power. So that is 4.5 to the 1
divided by third power. 1.65. So that's our answer. If x is equal to 1.65, you
know, plus some other points, then we have the cheapest
container to produce. It's 1.65 something something. And there you have it. Hopefully you found
that vaguely useful. 

Transcript for: Introduction to rate-of-change problems
We've learned a lot about
derivatives, and now we will use them to solve something
that is hopefully may be kind of useful. So let's just start with a
review of the chain rule, and I'm going to write
in a different way. So let's say I had the
function f of g of x. So what I'm going to do is I'm
going actually write this in a way that might be a bit foreign
to you, but I think with a little bit of explanation
you'll realize that this is the same thing as the chain rule
that we all know and love. I changed colors
really for no reason. Just to change colors. Sometimes I do that. I'll change colors again. The derivative of f of g of x
is equal to the rate at which f changes with respect to g. So that's df to dg times the
rate at which g changes with respect to x. And you're saying Sal, this
looks completely foreign to me. And one, you could think
about what I just said and I think it'll make sense. Or I could just rewrite
this in the traditional chain rule format. And this isn't really
the traditional. What I wrote is the
traditional, but the way I've taught you. So the way I taught you,
what's the change of f with respect to g? Well that's just f prime of g
of x times and what's the rate at which g changes
with respect to x? Well that's just g prime of x. So hopefully this make sense
to you that these are just two different ways of
writing the chain rule. I think what was this, this is
either Lagrange or Leibniz's notation, and this
the other guy. But I forget. And this actually makes sense
just from a fractions point of view that this term and that
term cancels out and you get, you know that this equals that
rate at which f changes with respect x. So with that out of the way,
let's use this to solve something kind of hopefully
a little bit neat. Let's say I have a cone. Let's say it's one of
those cups you have at the water cooler. That's the top of the cup. And let's say at any point in
the clone the ratio of the radius of the cone to the
height if this is the height, then the radius
is 1/2 of height. At any point. As you know, it's a fixed cone,
these are lines on both sides. So that ratio stays fixed. So just to start off with
some you maybe never even learned this. This will help us with
the problem later on. What's the volume of let's
say I'm filling water up to height h. Let's say this is where
the water line is. But that's where the
water is in this cone. What's the volume assuming
that the height is h. Assuming that I've let's say
8 centimeters of water. What is the volume of water
that I put in the cone? Well, if you don't know it, and
I sometimes well actually later when we do rotations of
solid into integration modules I can actually prove this to
you but the volume of a cone is equal to 1/3 base times
height, where the base is actually, you can kind of
view it as the surface area of the water. And what's the base? Well that's just equal to
volume is equal to 1/3. The base is equal to pi r
squared, where r is the radius. This is just kind of
solid geometry review. And what's the radius
in this case? It's 1/3 pi r squared times h. And in this example I
said that the radius is 1/2 of the height. So this equals 1/3 pi 1/2 the
height I just replaced it for r squared times h. We haven't done
any calculus yet. This is just complicated not
complicated really just a little bit hairy
solid geometry. And if we simplify that we get
volume is equal to let's see. So we get 1/2 squared is 1/4
times 1/3 is 1/12 pi, and then h squared times
h, h to the third. Very interesting, Now let's
start doing some calculus. I think this might
blow your mind. Let's say I am pouring water
into this cup at a rate of 1 cubic centimeter per second. And for you metric jocks,
you'll know sometimes doctors or nurses will say 1 cc, and
that's also equal to 1 millimeter. Just for other frames of
reference, but I like to stay in centimeters cubed per
second because we're going to work with centimeters
in multiple dimensions. But let's say we're pouring
1 centimeter cubed per second into this cup. I want to know this is an
interesting question how fast is the water level rising. How fast is h changing, the
height of the water, at the moment when h is equal
to 2 centimeters. So how do we do that? This just give us a static
picture of if we know the height we can figure
out the volume. But if we figure it out, if we
took the rate of change with respect to time off of both
sides of this equation, something interesting
might happen. So let's take the derivative
with respect time on both sides. So the derivative with respect
to time of the volume. Well that's just dv/dt. And what's the derivative
with respect to time of this side of the equation? Well it's the rate which v
changes with respect to h. This is v as a
function of h, right? So it's going to be dv as a
function how fast does v change with respect to h
times how fast does h change with respect to t. This is just the
chain rule up here. I want you to think about
this a little bit. It might not seem obvious
but all we're doing is the chain rule. It's a little confusing because
I had no t's in this equation before, and all of a sudden I'm
picking a derivative with respect to t. But let's just say that h
actually is a function of t, which as you know it is. So let's then just solve that. So dv the derivative of v
with respect to t is equal to the derivative of
v with respect to h. Well that's easy. The derivative of v with
respect to h is just simple. So 3 times 1/12, that's 3/12. That's 1/4 pi, so we can just
write pi over 4 h squared. So that's this part. And in this part is just
still see, I can rewrite in this new color
dh/dt, times dh/dt. So you're saying Sal,
what have you now done. I said the rate of which the
volume is changing with respect to time is equal to pi over 4
times the height squared times the rate at which the height is
changing with respect to time. So can this solve
the problem for us? Well what do we know? We know the rate at which
the volume is changing with respect to time. 1 centimeter cubed
per second squared. So we could say dv/dt
is equal to 1. I'm going to get
rid of the units. Most physics instructors
would cringe. But 1 centimeter cubed per
second is equal to pi over 4. This one is v the rate at
which the volume is changing with respect to time. pi over 4 h squared. We know what h is right
now. h is 2, so it's 2 squared times 4. We said the height is 2
right then, so 2 squared is 4 times dh/dt. So this cancels out, and we get
1 is equal to pi times dh/dt. And we solve for dt/dt we
get let me make sure not to confuse you. The rate at which the height of
water is changing with respect to time is just 1 over pi. Fascinating. Or 1 over pi centimeters
per second. So we can figure out what this
number is, it's going to be like 0.3 something. So 0.3 something centimeters
per second is the rate at which the height of the water level
is going to change as I put 1 centimeter cubed of volume
into this cup per second. I have probably confused you. You may want to
watch this again. And I'll do a couple more
videos with these rates of change problems because these
tend to confuse people, but once you get the hang of it, I
think you'll see that they're not so bad. I'll see you the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Equation of a tangent line | Taking derivatives | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I've told you multiple times
that the derivative of a curve at a point is the slope of the
tangent line, but our friend [? Akosh ?] sent me a problem where it
actually wants you to find the equation of the tangent line. And I realize, I've never
actually done that. So it's worthwhile. So let's do that. So it says, find the equation
of the tangent line to the function f of x is equal to x e
to the x at x is equal to 1. So let's just get an intuition
of what we're even looking for. So this function is going to
look something like, I actually graphed it, because it's not
a trivial function to graph. So this is x e to the x,
this is what it looks like. I'm just using a graphing
calculator, and you can see, I just typed it in. And what this is
asking us, is ok. At the point, x is equal to 1. So this is the point
x is equal to one. So f of x is going to be
someplace up here, and actually, f of x is going
to be equal to e, right? Because f of 1 is
equal to what? 1 times e to the 1. So it equals e. So we're saying at the point,
at the point 1 comma e, so at the point 1 comma 2.71,
whatever, whatever. So that's what point? That's this point. So it's right here. 2 point, this is e right
here, the point 1 comma e. So we want to do is figure
out the equation of the line tangent to this point. So what we're going to do, is
we're going to solve it by figuring out its slope, which
is just the derivative at that point. So we have to figure
out the derivative at exactly this point. And then we use what we learned
from algebra 1 to figure out its equation, and we'll graph
it here, just to confirm that we actually figured out the
equation of the tangent line. So the first thing we want to
know is the slope of the tangent line, and that's just
the derivative at this point. When x is equal to 1, or
at the point 1 comma e. So what's the
derivative of this? So f prime of x. f prime of x is equal to,
well, this looks like a job for the product rule. Because we know how to figure
out the derivative of x, we know how to figure out the
derivative of e to the x, and they're just multiplying
by each other. So the product rules help us. The derivative of this thing
is going to be equal to the derivative of the first
expression of the first function. So the derivative of x is just
1, times the second function, times e to the x, plus the
first function, x, times the derivative of the
second function. So what's the derivative
of e to the x? And that's what I find so
amazing about the number e, or the function e to the x, is
that the derivative of e to the x is e to the x. The slope at any point of
this curve is equal to the value of the function. So this is the derivative. So what is the derivative of
this function at the point x is equal to 1, or at
the point 1 comma e? So we just evaluate it. We say f prime of 1 is equal to
1 time e to the 1 plus 1 times e to the 1, well, that's
just equal e plus e. And that's just equal to 2 e. And you know, we could figure
out what that number, e is just a constant number, but we write
e because it's easier to write e than 2.7 et cetera, and an
infinite number of digits, so we just write 2e. So this is the slope of the
equation, or this is the slope of the curve when x is equal to
one, or at the point 1e, or 1 f of 1. So what is the equation
of the tangent line? So let's go ahead and take this
form, the equation's going to be y is equal to, I'm just
writing it in the, you know, not the point slope, the mx
plus b form that you learned in algebra. So the slope is going to be 2e. We just learned that here. That's the derivative
when x is equal to 1. So 2e times x plus
the y-intercept. So if we can figure out
the y-intercept of this line, we are done. We have figured out the
equation of the tangent line. So how do we do that? Well, if we knew a y or
an x where this equation goes through, we could
then solve for b. And we know a y and x that
satisfies this equation. The point 1 comma e. The point where we're trying to
find the tangent line, right? So this point, 1 comma e,
this is where we want to find the tangent line. And by definition, the
tangent line is going to go through that point. So let's substitute those
points back in here, or this point back into this equation,
and then solve for b. So y is equal to e, is equal to
2 e, that's just the slope at that point, times x,
times 1, plus b. It might confuse you, because
e, you'll say, oh, e, is that a variable? No, it's a number,
remember, it's like pi. It's a number. You can substitute 2.7 whatever
there, but we're not doing that, because this is cleaner. And let's solve. So you get e is
equal to 2e plus b. Let's subtract 2e
from both sides. You get b is equal
to e minus 2e. b is equal to minus e. Now we're done. What's the equation
of the tangent line? It is y is equal to
2 times e x plus b. But b is minus e,
so it's minus e. So this is the equation
of the tangent line. If you don't like these e's
there, you could replace that with the number 2.7 et cetera,
and this would become 5 point something, and this would
just be minus 2.7 something. But this looks neater. And let's confirm. Let's use this little graphing
calculator to confirm that that really is the equation
of the tangent line. So let me type it in here. So it's 2, 2 times e times x,
right, that's 2ex minus e. And let us graph this line. There we go. It graphed it. And notice that that line, that
green line, I don't know if you can, maybe I need to make this
bigger for it to show up, bolder. I don't know if that helps. But if you look here, so this
red, this is our original equation, x e to the
x, that's this curve. We want to know equation
of the tangent line at x is equal to 1. So it's the point
x is equal to 1. And when x is equal to 1, f of
x is e, right, you can just substitute back into the
original equation to get that. So this is the
point, 1 comma e. So the equation of the tangent
line, its slope is going to be the derivative at this point. So we solved the derivative of
this function, and evaluated it at x is equal to 1. That's what we did here. We figured out the derivative,
evaluated x equals 1. And so we said, OK, the slope. The slope at when x is equal to
1 and y is equal to e, the slope at that point
is equal to 2e. And we figured that out
from the derivative. And then we just used our
algebra 1 skills to figure out the equation of that line. And how did we do that? We knew the slope, because
that's just the derivative at that point. And then we just have to
solve for the y-intercept. And the way we did that is we
said, well, the point 1 comma e is on this green line as well. So we substituted that in, and
solve for our y-intercept, which we got as minus e, and
notice that this line intersects the y-axis at minus
e, that's about minus 2.7 something. And there we have it. We have shown that, and
visually, it shows that this is the tangent line. Anyway, hope you found
that vaguely useful. If you did, you should
thank [? Akosh ?] for being unusually persistent,
and having me do this problem. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Rates-of-change (part 2)
Welcome back. I'm now going to actually do a
couple more rates of change problems because I think the
first one I did was probably a little bit more complicated
than I wanted, and the hard part was actually the geometry
and not the calculus. So let's just say I drop
a rock into a pond and it has a ripple. And the ripple spreads out
it'll probably have multiple ripples, but let's just say
we focus on one ripple. And the ripple is
spreading out. So let me draw. This is where I dropped the
rock, and then this is a ripple in the pond. It would be an actual
circle, which isn't what I drew, but close enough. So let me say that
let's call r. r is not for ripple. r is the distance that the
ripple is from the center from where it started
from the get go. And it's not by chance that
that's also for radius. So let's say that the
ripple is moving out at 2 meters per second. So the rate at which r is
changing with respect to t is 2 meters per second. And what I want to know is what
is the rate at which the area that's kind of included by this
ripple this entire area how fast is that changing
with respect to time. When the ripple is let's say
3 meters from the center. When the ripple is
equal to 3 meters. Well do we know any relation
between the area of the circle essentially, and the distance
of the ripple, or the radius? Well yes we do. Area is equal to pi r squared. So we want to figure out the
rate at which area changes with respect to time. So what does a chain
rule tell us? The chain rule tells us that
the rate at which a changes with respect to t is equal to
the rate at which a changes with respect to r times the
rate at which r changes with respect to t. Well we already know
this piece, right? We already know the rate
at which r is changing with respect to time. That's right here. All we have to do to figure out
the rate at which a is changing with respect to time is we have
to figure out the rate at which a changes with respect to r. Well that's just
the derivative. The derivative with
respect to r. The derivative with respect to
r do it of both sides of a equals the derivative with
respect to r of pi r squared. So we get da/dr is equal
to what's the derivative with respect to r here? Well that's easy. Just 2 times pi r to the 1. That's pretty interesting by
itself that the rate at which the derivative of the area
formula really is what? This formula by itself
looks interesting, right? That's a formula for the
circumference of a circle. So the derivative of an area of
a circle with respect to the radius is a circumference. That is mildly fascinating. Something even more interesting
is to figure out what the antiderivative is of the area
and compare that to the volume of a sphere. You can look it up on
Wikipedia or something. Or even compare that to the
surface area of the sphere, and just keep picking derivatives
and integrals and they'll be some pretty interesting
relationships. But anyway. Back to the problem. Not to go on too
far of a tangent. So we figured out the
rate at which 8 changes with respect to r. So going back to our original
thing, we now know that the rate at which a changes with
respect to t is equal to the rate at which a changes
with respect to r. Well that's just
right here, right? The rate at which a changes
with respect to r. Well that's just 2 pi r times
the rate at which r is changing with respect to t. Well the rate at which r
changes with respect to t is just right here. 2 meters per second,
we figured that out. So 2 pi r times 2 well I
won't include the units because that might
confuse you right now. So the rate at at which a
is changing with respect to t is 2 pi r times 2. Well are we done yet? Well no, because we haven't
substituted yet for r. So what is r? Well we know. r is three
meters, so da/dt is equal to 2 times pi times 3 times 2. So what is that? 2 times 3 is 6 times 2 is 12. 12 pi and it's meters squared
per second, because it's the rate at which area square
meters is changing with respect to time. And if we multiply out the
units we would have gotten the same thing right here. So in the next video i'm going
to do a slightly harder rate of change problem just so that you
see that it doesn't only apply to kind of purely
geometric things. It applies to pretty much
anything that you can find a relationship
between two values. See you in the next module. 

Transcript for: Ladder rate-of-change problem
I've been requested to do a
ladder rate of change problem. And I figure I would do one,
because it really is the classic rate of change problem. And it's part of any complete
calculus education. So what is the ladder
rate of change problem? So let's say I have the ground. And I will do the
ground in brown. Let me see. Where am I going
to draw my wall? This is the ground. That's too thin. Let's say this is the ground. A thicker ground. That's the ground, and then
I have a yellow wall. This is my yellow wall. And then leaning against
that yellow wall and the ground, I have a ladder. This is the ladder. I'm looking at it
from the side. I'm just going to give a
side view of the ladder. This is the wall, this is
the ground, that's a ladder leaning against the wall. And let's say that my
ladder is 10 meters long. And let's say that for whatever
reason I've kind of greased up this wall and the floor here. And so a normal ladder would
just kind of stay where it is, but especially because this
floor is all greased up, the bottom of this ladder
is moving to the left. So let me draw that. Let me draw an arrow. So the bottom of this ladder
is moving to the left. And let's say it's
moving to the left at 4 meters per second. So let's think about a couple
of things; what's happening. When this point right here is
moving to the left at 4 meters per second, as long as we have
some height here you know, at some point this whole thing
is going to fall down. The ladder, for whatever
arbitrary reason, will just be sliding along the ground. Maybe someone's pulling
it or whatever. But before the latter
completely falls to the ground, while this is being pulled out
this way, this point right here is going to be coming down. Right? Think about it. In fact, that's probably
what's causing it to slide to the left. And actually it'll do it
at an accelerating rate. And we're not going to
worry all about that. We're just going to do the
classic ladder problem. But I just want to give you the
intuition that if you were to put a roller here and put a
roller there, that that's what a ladder would do. It would slide down. And when it slides down, this
point would go to the base of the floor right here. Right? This point would go down. And this point would go out to
the left, until the ladder is in something like
this position. Until it is flat on the ground. I'm just doing it
right below the line. Right? At that point it would either
stop, but if someone's pulling it then it could continue to
go at 4 meters per second. Whatever. So hopefully you're
satisfied with that. So my question to you is, what
is the rate of change of this point of the kind of top of
the ladder what is its rate of change downwards when the
left point of the ladder right here is going to the left at 4
meters per second, and this distance right here let me
do it in a different color is 8 meters? Actually, let me do the mirror
image of that, just because I don't want to use negative
numbers and all of that. I just realized that. So let me just draw it really
messy real quick on this side. So that's the ground,
that's the wall. I'll do the ladder in a
different color still. That's the ladder. It's 10 meters. This point right here is
moving to the right at 4 meters per second. Actually, I'm going to do the
horizontal component as x, and I wanted this to be a positive
x-value instead of a negative x-value. So that's why I did that. We're 8 meters away,
so it's positive x. Right? If we take this 0, 0. And what I want to figure out
is the rate of change of this point of the ladder, the
top point of the ladder. How fast is that moving down? Right? So how do we think about this? Well let's call this distance
right here x, because it is. It's kind of the
horizontal displacement. And let's call this
distance up here y. Right? So at any given point in time,
how does x, y and 10 relate? Well, this is a right
angle, so we can use the Pythagorean theorem. So we know that x squared plus
y squared is equal to what? It's equal to the
hypotenuse squared. It's equal to 10 squared,
which is equal to 100. So this right here describes,
if you've watched the video on implicit functions or implicit
differentiation, this is kind of an implicit
function of x and y. Right? Or an implicit function
of x, really. So what can we do now? Well, we're dealing with rates
of change with respect to time. Right? This is 4 meters per second. This is the rate of change,
or this 4 meters per second. This is the rate of change
at which x is changing with respect to time. Right? That's dx/dt. How much does x move in a
very small amount of time? And what are we looking for? We're looking for how fast is
this y-value moving downward. Right? So we're looking for dy/dt. That's essentially what the
question is asking for. How fast is y changing as a
function of time when x is changing at a function of
time at 4 meters per second, and the value of x is
equal to 8 meters. So I know that seems very
complicated, but essentially all we do is we take the
derivative of both sides of this equation with
respect to time. So let's do that. So let's take the derivative
with respect to time of x squared plus y squared. Equals and we have to do it
to both sides of this equation. 100. So what's the derivative with
respect to time of x squared? Well, it's the chain rule. It's the derivative with
respect to x of this entire expression. So that's 2x times the
derivative of x with respect to time. That's just the chain rule. Plus the derivative of this
expression with respect to y. So that's 2y. Times the derivative of
y with respect to time. And if you found this to be a
little confusing you might want to watch the video that
we actually just did on implicit differentiation. It gives a little bit more
intuition why this really just is the chain rule. But hopefully you get
this a little bit. And then how much does 100
change with respect to time? Well, this 100 value is never
going to change, because, frankly, the length of
the ladder is never going to change. Right? That's where that
100 comes from. It's 10 squared. So the rate of 100 with respect
to time, well it never changes so it's equal to 0. Well what do we know? We know x. Right? We know x is what? x is, at this point
in time, 8 meters. We know the change of x
with respect to time is 4 meters per second. Do we know y? Well, I think we do. When x is 8, what is y? Well, we could just use
this formula right here. We have 8 squared plus y
squared is equal to 100. So 64 plus y squared
is equal to 100. Or y squared is equal to 36. So y is plus or minus 6, but we
know that we're only dealing with positive values at least
in this example right here. So y is equal to 6. So we know x, we know the rate
of change of x versus time. That was given in the problem
4 meters per second. We know y. So then we can solve for
the rate of change of y with respect to time. So let's do that. Let's just substitute
the values. So what's x? We're saying, well what is the
rate of change of y with respect to time when x is 8? So we get 2 times 8 that's x. Times the change
in so this is 8. What's the change in x
with respect to time at this moment in time? It's 4 meters per second. That's 4. So 2 times 8 times 4. Plus 2y. We just figured
out that y is 6. So plus 2 times 6. Times and this is what
we're solving for. dy/dt is equal to 0. So what is this? 2 times 8 is 16. Times 4 is 64. Right? So 64 plus 12 dy/dt. And let me erase some stuff. I tend to try to crowd too
much into one window, making things confusing. Actually, we've actually
already drawn that. So let me erase my woops. I think that is good enough. OK. So then we can
simplify up here. That equals 0. Subtract 64 from both
sides, we get 12 dy/dt is equal to minus 64. And then you get the change
in y with respect to time is equal to minus 64 over 12. And what's the greatest
common factor? I think it's a 4. So that equals minus 16 over 3. Right? Or you could say that's
5 and 1/3, or 5.3. And it's going to be
meters per second. That's the units. Let me write it that way. Is equal to minus 5.33 I
mean, you could whatever meters per second. And there we have it. And then you might say, hey,
why is there that minus there? Well it makes sense, because
while the x-value, it's rate of change with respect to
time, it's going in the positive direction. Right? At least the way
I drew it here. The x is going to the right,
so it's change is positive. But what's happening
to the y-value? The y-value, you could say
its velocity is downward. So that's where that negative
value comes from, because it has a negative velocity. I mean really this is kind of
just the x and y velocities of those different points. And you know, you can think
about it a little bit that at least at that point in time
while the x-value is increasing at 4 meters per second, the
y-value is moving even faster downward. So that's something
to think about. But you might want to
experiment with it at different points in time, because it's
going to be dependent on where we are and kind of what does
the right triangle look like. But anyway, that is the classic
rate of change problem the ladder problem. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Mean value theorem | Derivative applications | Differential Calculus | Khan Academy
I've gotten several requests
to explain or teach the mean value theorem. So let's do that in this video. So this is the mean
value theorem. And I have mixed feelings
about the mean value theorem. It's kind of neat, but what
you'll see is, it might not be obvious to prove, but the
intuition behind it's pretty obvious. And the reason I have mixed
feelings about it, is that even though, as you'll hopefully
see, the intuition is pretty obvious, but they stick it in
the math books, and people are just trying to learn calculus,
and get to what matters, and then they put the mean value
theorem in there, and they have all of this function notation,
and they have all of these words, and it just
confuses people. So hopefully this video will
clarify that little bit, and I'm curious to see
what you think of it. So let's see. What does the mean
value theorem say? Let me draw some axes. I'll do a visual
explanation first. I think this calls for magenta. So that's my x-axis. This is my y-axis. And let's say I have
some function f of x. So let me draw my f of x. That's as good as any. And this is some function f
of x, and I'm going to put a few conditions on f of x. f of x has to be continuous
and differentiable. And I know a lot of you
probably get intimidated when you hear these words. It sounds like what a
mathematician would say, and it sounds very abstract. All continuous means is that
the curve is connected to itself as you go along it. And here, the conditions are
over a closed interval. This is another very
mathy term you'll see. So you'll often say, on a
closed interval from a to b. All that means is an interval,
let's say a is the low point, let's say this is a, we don't
know what number that is. That could be minus
5, or who knows. And let's say this is b, right
here, let me b right here. Let's say that's be. So when people talk about a
closed interval, defined on a closed interval, that means
that the function needs to be defined at every number between
a and b, and the function needs to be defined at a and at b. If they said over an open
interval between a and b, that means that it's only defined at
every value between a and b, but not necessarily at a and b. So it has to be continuous,
differentiable, and let's say it's defined over the closed
interval, and this is just the notation for it, a b. So that means, it has to be
defined at all of the x values from a to b, including a and b. If it was an open interval,
you would write it like this. You'd write a and b. That means an interval for all
the numbers between a and b, but not including those. So let's ignore that for now. So back to the mean
value theorem. So you know, hopefully,
what continuous means. Let me draw here a function
that's not continuous. So a function that is
not continuous would look like this. It would go like this,
and it would start up here, go like that. Right? So this would be an example
of a function, let's say, same axes, let me draw
it in a different color. If that was our y no,
that's not a good. If that was our y-axis, and
that was our x-axis, just to give you the reference
for what I drew. So if the function is
continuous, continuous, continuous, and then it jumps,
that disconnect, that would make this function
discontinuous, or it would not be a continuous function. So a function just has
to be continuous. And now what does
differentiable mean? Differentiable means that at
every point over the interval that we care about, you have to
be able to find the derivative. That means you can take
the derivative of it. It's a differentiable. And what else does that mean? Well, that means that if you
were to graph the derivative of this function, that
it is also continuous. And I'll let you think
about that for a second. And actually, in this video I'm
going to show you an example of a function that is continuous,
but not differentiable and because of that, the mean
value theorem breaks down. But anyway, let's get back
to the mean value theorem. Most of the functions we
deal with satisfy all three of these things. Unless, you know, you're doing
limit problems, and they try to make these things break down. Anyway, back to the function. So this function meets all
of these requirements. So all it says is, if I were
take the average slope between point a and point b. So what is the slope, the
average slope between point a and point b? Well, slope is just
rise over run, right? So what is it? Let me see if I can draw
the average slope. So the run would
be this distance. That'd be the run, right,
and this would be the rise. So this is the point,
right here, that's the point a, f of a. Over here, this is
the point b, f of b. So what's the average
slope between a and b? Well, it's rise over run. So what's the rise? What's this distance? How much have we gone up
from f of a to f of b? Well, the rise will
just be f of b, this height, minus f of a. f of b minus f of a. And what's the run,
what's this distance? Well, it's just b minus a. And if I were to draw a line
that has that average slope, it would look something like this. We could make it go through
those two points, but it really doesn't have to. Let me do it in a blue. So that's the average
slope between those two points, right? So what does the mean
value theorem tell us? It says, if f of x is defined
over this closed interval from a to b, and f of x is
continuous, and it's differentiable, that you could
take the derivative at any point, that there must be some
points c f prime of c is equal to this thing. So is equal to f prime of c. I shouldn't have
written it here. So what is that telling us? So all that's telling us,
is if we're continuous, differentiable, defined over
the closed interval, that there's some point c, oh, and c
has to be between a and b, there's some point between a
and b, and it could be at one of the points, but there's some
point c where the derivative at c, or the slope at c, the
instantaneous slope at c, is exactly equal to the average
slope over that interval. So what does that mean? So we can look at it visually. Is there any point along this
curve where the slope looks very similar to this average
slope that we calculated? Well, sure, let's see. It looks like, maybe,
this point, right here? Just the way I drew it. This is very inexact. But that point looks like the
slope, you know, I could say the slope is something
like that, right there. So we don't know what,
analytically, this function is, but visually, you could see
that at this point c, the derivative, so I just
picked that point. So this could be our point c. And how do we just say that? Well, because f prime of c is
this slope, and it's equal to the average slope. So f prime of c is this thing,
and it's going to be equal to the average slope over
the whole thing. And this curve actually
probably has another point where the slope is equal
to the average slope. Let's see. This one looks, like,
right around there. Just the way I drew it. Looks like the slope there
could look something like, could be parallel as well. These lines should be parallel. The tangent lines
should be parallel. So hopefully that makes
a little sense to you. Another way to think about it
is that your average, actually, let me draw a graph just
to make sure that we hit the point home. Let's draw my position
as a function of time. So this is something,
this'll make it applicable to the real world. So that's my x-axis, or
the time axis, that's my position axis. This is going back to our
original intuition of what even a derivative is. So this is time, and I call
this position, or distance, or it doesn't matter. Position. And if I was moving at a
constant velocity, my position as a function of time would
just be a straight line, right? And the velocity is
actually your slope. But let's say I had
a varying velocity. And in reality, if you're
driving a car, you are always at a variable velocity. So let's say I start at a
standstill at time t equals 0, and then I accelerate, then I
decelerate a little bit, decelerate a little bit, I keep
decelerating, and then I come to a standstill, so my
position stays still. Then I accelerate
again, decelerate, accelerate, et cetera. Right? So this could be, you know, I
have a variable velocity, and this could be my position
as a function of time. So all this says, let's
say that after, this is time 0, position 0. Let's say after 1 hour, let's
say that is 1 hour, this time equals 1 hour, let's say
I have gone 60 miles. So what can you say? You could say that my average
velocity equals just change in distance divided by
change in times. It equals 60 miles per hour. So what the mean values
theorem says, is OK. Your average velocity, so you
could almost view it as the average slope between this
point and this point with 60, if your average velocity was 60
miles per hour, there was some point in time, maybe more, but
there was at least one point in time, where you were going
exactly sixty miles per hour. That make sense, right? If you average 60 miles per
hour, maybe you're going 40 miles per hour some of the
point, but at some point you went 80, and in between you had
to be going 60 miles per hour. So let me see if I can
draw that graphically. So this slope is my average
velocity, and the way I drew it, there's probably two
points, let's see, probably right around here, I was
probably going 60 miles per hour, the slope is probably
60 there, the instantaneous velocity probably
there, as well. So before I leave, let's do
this analytically, just to work with numbers. And the reason why I have mixed
feelings about the mean value theorem, it's useful later on,
probably if you become a math major you'll maybe use it to
prove some theorems, or maybe you'll prove it, itself. But if you're just applying
calculus for the most part, you're not going to be
using the mean value theorem too much. But anyway, if you've got to
know it, you've got to know it, and it tells you something else
about the world, so it's interesting that way. So let's say we have the
function f of x is equal to x squared minus 4x, and the
interval that I care about here is between, is a closed
interval, so I'm including 2, from 2 to 4. Now, the mean value theorem
tells us that if this function is defined on this
interval, and it is, right? We could put any number. The domain of this is actually
all real numbers, I could put any number here, so obviously
it's going to be defined over this interval. But so it's defined over the
interval, this is continuous, this is differentiable. You could take the derivative,
and the derivative is continuous. So the mean value theorem
should apply here. So let's see what value of
c is equal to the average slope between 2 and 4. So what's the average
slope between 2 and 4? Well, it's going to be f of 4,
so the change in the function, f of 4 minus f of 2 divided by
the change in x, so 4 minus 2. So this equal to
the average slope. So f of 4 is 16
minus 16, right? So that's 0. Let me make sure of that. 4 times 4, 16, minus 4
times 4, 16, right. Minus f of 2. f of 2 is 2 squared,
is 4, right, and then minus 4 times 2. So minus 8. All of that over 2. And so this equals minus 4. So this equals 4 over 2. So the average slope from
x is equal to 2 to x is equal to 4 is 2. And now the mean value theorem
tells us, that there must be some point that's between these
two, maybe including one of those, where the slope at that
point is exactly equal to 2. Let's figure out
what point that is. That c. Let's take the derivative,
because the derivative at c is going to be equal to 2. So we just take the derivative. So let's say f prime of x
is equal to 2x minus four. And we want to figure out, at
what x value does this equal 2. So we say, 2x minus 4 is equal to 2. Where does the slope equal 2? And you get 2x is equal
to 6, x is equal to 3. So if x is equal to 3, the
derivative is exactly equal to the average slope. But let me see if I can,
let me get the graphing calculator here. Let me what I can do. OK. So here's the graph of
x squared minus 4x. Let me see if I can make
it a little bit bigger. The interval that we care
about is from here to here. So the average slope over
that interval was 2. So if we were to draw the
slope, it was like that, the slope would look like that. And at the point 3, the
slope is exactly 2. So let me actually draw that. This isn't too hard
to draw, for myself. Let me see. So if that's the x-axis, I'll
want that graph out of the way. That's the y-axis. So the graph goes through
the point 0, 0 as neatly as possible. Nope, that's not neat. So the graph goes something
like this, it dips up, then it goes like that, and actually
it keeps going straight up, like that, it's a parabola. So this is point 4. The point 2 is here. And at 2 we're at negative
4, so the vertex is at the point 2, minus four. So what we said, the average
slope, so the closed interval that we care about, between 2
and 4, it's from 2 here to 4 here. That's the interval, 2 to 4. The average slope is 2. Doesn't look like it, only
because I've kind of compressed the y-axis. And we're saying, at the point
x is equal to 3, the slope is equal to exactly that. So at x is equal to three,
the slope is equal to the same thing. That's all the mean
value theorem is. I know sounds complicated. People talk about continuity,
and differentiability, and f prime of c, and all this, but
all it says is, there's some point between these two points
where the instantaneous slope, or slope exactly at that
point, is equal to the slope between these two points. Hope I didn't confuse you. 

Transcript for: The Indefinite Integral or Anti-derivative
Welcome to the presentation
on the indefinite integral or the antiderivative. So let's begin with a
bit of a review of the actual derivative. So if I were to take
the derivative d/dx. It's just the
derivative operator. If I were to take the
derivative of the expression x squared this is an easy
one if you remember the derivative presentation. Well, this is pretty
straightforward. You just take the exponent. That becomes the new
coefficient, right. You actually multiply it times
the old coefficient, but in this case the old coefficient
is 1, so 2 times 1 is 2. And you take the variable 2x. And then the new exponent
will be one less than the old exponent. So it'll be 2x to
the 1, or just 2x. So that was easy. If I had y equals x squared we
now know that the slope at any point on that curve,
it would be 2x. So what if we wanted
to go the other way? Let's say if we wanted to start
with 2x, and I wanted to say 2x is the derivative of what. Well, we know the answer
this question, right? Because we just took the
derivative of x squared and we figured out 2x. But let's say we didn't
know this already. You could probably figure it
out intuitively, how you can kind of do this operation
that we did here, how you can do it backwards. So in this case the notation
well we know it's x squared but the notation for trying to
figure out 2x is the derivative of what, we could say that
let's say 2x is the derivative of y. So 2x is the derivative of y. Let's get rid of this of what. Then we can say this. We can say that y is equal to
and I'm going to throw some very fancy notation at you and
actually I'll explain why we use this notation in a couple
presentations down the road. But you just have to know at
this point what the notation means or what it tells you to
really do, which really is just the antiderivative or
the indefinite integral. So we could say that y is
equal to the indefinite integral 2x dx. And I'm going to explain what
this squiggly line here is and dx, but all you have to know is
when you see the squiggly line and this dx and then something
in between, all they're asking is they want you to figure out
what the antiderivative of this expression is. And I'll explain later
why this is called the indefinite integral. And actually this notation
will make a lot more sense when I show you what a
definite integral is. But let's just take it for
granted right now that an indefinite integral which I
just drew here, it's kind of like a little squirrely thing
is just the antiderivative. So y is equal to the
antiderivative essentially, or the indefinite integral
of the expression 2x. So what is y equal to? Well y is obviously
equal to x squared. Let me ask you a question. Is y just equal to x squared? Because we took the derivative,
and clearly the derivative of x squared is 2x. But what's the derivative
of x squared what's the derivative x squared plus 1? Well, the derivative of
x squared is still 2x. What's the derivative of 1? Right, derivative of 1
is 0, so it's 2x plus 0, or still just 2x. Similarly, what's the
derivative of x squared plus 2? Well the derivative of
x squared plus 2 once again is 2x plus 0. So notice the derivative
of x squared plus any constant is 2x. So really y could be x
squared plus any constant. And for any constant
we put a big c there. So x squared plus c. And you'll meet many calculus
teachers that will mark this problem wrong if you forget to
put the plus c when you do an indefinite integral. So you're saying Sal, OK,
you've showed me some notation, you've reminded me that the
derivative of any constant number is 0, but this really
doesn't help you solve an indefinite integral. Well let's think about a way
a systematic way if I didn't do it for you already
that we could solve an indefinite integral. Let me clear this. A bolder color I think would
make this more interesting. Let's say we said y is equal to
the indefinite integral of let me throw something
interesting in there. Let's say the indefinite
integral of x cubed dx. So we want to figure out some
function whose derivative is x to the third. Well how can we
figure that out? Well just from your intuition,
you probably think, well it's probably something times x
to the something, right? So let's say that y is
equal to a x to the n. So then what is dy/dx, or
the derivative of y is n. Well we learned this in
the derivative module. You take the exponent, multiply
it by the coefficient. So it's a times n. And then it's x to
the n minus 1. Well in this situation we're
saying that x to the third is this expression, it's
the derivative of y. This is equal to
x to the third. So if this is equal to x to
third, what's a and what's n. Well, n is easy to figure out. n minus 1 is equal to 3. So that means that
n is equal to 4. And then what is a equal to? Well a times n is equal to 1,
right, because we just have a 1 in this coefficient, this has
a starting coefficient of 1. So a times n is 1. If n is 4, than a must be 1/4. So just using this definition
of a derivative, I think we now figured out what y is equal to. y is equal to 1/4
x to the fourth. I think you might start
seeing a pattern here. Well how did we get
from x to the third to 1/4 x to the fourth? Well, we increased the exponent
by 1, and whatever the new exponent is, we multiply it
times 1 over that new exponent. So let's think if we can do
a generalized rule here. Oh, and of course, plus c. I would have failed this exam. So let's make a general rule
that if I have the integral of well, since we already
used a, let's say b times x to the n dx. What is this integral? This is an integral sign. Well my new rule is, I raise
the exponent on x by 1, so it's going to be x to the n plus 1. And then I multiply x times
the inverse of this number. So times 1 over n plus 1. And of course I had that
b there all the time. And one day I'll do a more
vigorous more rigorous proof and maybe it will be vigorous
as well as to why this b just stays multiplying. Actually I don't have to do too
rigorous of a proof if you just remember how a derivative is
done, you just multiply this times the exponent minus 1. So here we multiply the
coefficient times 1 over the exponent plus 1. It's just the
inverse operation. So let's do a couple of
examples like this really fast. I have a little time left. I think the examples, at
least for me, really hit the point home. So let's say I wanted to
figure out the integral of 5 x to the seventh dx. Well, I take the exponent,
increase it by one. So I get x to the eighth, and
then I multiply the coefficient times 1 over the new exponent. So it's 5/8 x to the eighth. And if you don't trust me,
take the derivative of this. Take the derivative d/dx
of 5/8 x to the eighth. Well you multiply 8 times 5/8. Well that equals 5 x to the
and now the new exponent will be 8 minus 1 5 x
to the seventh. Oh, and of course, plus c. Don't want to
forget the plus c. So I think you have a
sense of how this works. In the next presentation I'm
going to do a bunch more examples, and I'll also
show you how to kind of reverse the chain rule. And then we'll learn
integration by parts, which is essentially just reversing
the product rule. See you in the next
presentation. 

Transcript for: Indefinite integrals (part II)
Welcome back. In this presentation I'm just
going to do a bunch of examples of taking the antiderivative or
the indefinite integral of polynomial expressions, and
hopefully I'll show you that it's a pretty straightforward
thing to do. So let's get started. If I wanted to take indefinite
integral and you could do a web search for integral and
you'll see this drawn properly take the indefinite
integral let me make a big expression. Let's say I want to take the
indefinite integral of 3x to the negative 5 minus 7x
to the third plus 3 minus x to the ninth. So you might already
be intimidated by what I wrote down. Well, one, if you saw the
last presentation or if you understood presentation, you
probably realize, well the indefinite integral even
though it looks like fancy math isn't that fancy. Or at least it isn't that
difficult to perform. And all you have to realize now
is if we took the derivative of a polynomial, it was just the
sum of the derivatives of each of the terms. it actually it turns out is the
same way the other way around. The antiderivative of this
entire expression is just the sum of the antidervatives of
each of the individual terms. So we can just take
the [? integers ?] of each term and we'll
get the answer. So what does this equal? Well in this case 3x
to the minus 5 power. So we take the exponent, we add
1 to the exponent, so now we get x to the negative 4, and
then we multiply the coefficient times 1
over the new exponent. So 1 over the new
exponent is minus 1/4. So 3 times minus
1/4 is minus 3/4. And let's see. Here we have x to the third. So instead of x to the third,
let's raise it by one number. So we get x to the fourth. And then we multiply
the coefficient. You know, we could either just
keep the minus and say the coefficient's 7, or we could
just say the coefficient is minus 7. We multiply the coefficient
times 1 over the new exponent. So the new exponent is 4,
so we multiply 1/4 times minus 7, so minus 7/4. And now this is interesting. 3, just 3. Well how do we apply this? Well isn't 3 the same thing
as 3 times x to the 0? Right, because x to
the 0 is just 1. And that's how you
should view it. It shows you that this rule
is actually very consistent. So what's the answer
derivative of 3? Well if we view 3 as 3 x to the
0, we raise the exponent by 1, so now we're going
to have x to the 1. And x to the 1 is just
x, so I'm just going to leave it as an x. And we multiply it, the old
coefficient this 3 or you know the derivative
coefficient we multiply that times 1 over the inverse
of the new exponent. So the exponent's 1, so
the inverse of 1 is 1, so it just stays 3. We've multiplied 3 times
1/1, which is still just 3. And then finally x to the
ninth I think you're getting the hang of this we raise the
exponent by one, x to the tenth. And then we multiply the
current coefficient. Well the current coefficient
is minus 1, right. We just didn't
write the 1 there. We multiply the current
coefficient minus 1 times 1 over the new exponent,
so it's minus 1/10. There we did it. That wasn't too difficult of
taking the antiderivative or I always forget. Plus c, right? Because when you take the
derivative of any constant it becomes 0, so it might
have disappeared here. So plus c where this
is any constant. This could be a 10, could
be a million, could be a minus trillion. It's any constant. And just to really hit the
point home, let's take the derivative of this and just
make sure we got this expression. And hopefully this is second
nature to you by now. And you know if you ever run
out of practice problems in your book because you
love doing math so much, just make up problems. That's what I'm doing. I do this even when I'm not
recording videos, just for fun. So let's take the
derivative of this. Minus 4 times this coefficient. Minus 4 times minus 3/4 is 3x. Then we subtract 1 from
this exponent, minus 5. And then 4 times 4 is minus 7 x
to the we take 1 from this exponent x to the third. And I promise you I'm not
even looking up here. I know you might think, well
Sal, he's just looking up here, but no I'm actually in my head
at least working through this. And then plus the
derivative of 3x. Well the derivative of 3x is
3 is almost second nature now, but you can kind of
do this is 3x to the 1. And you say 1 times 3
is 3 times x to the 0. And then 10 times minus 1/10. Well that's just minus 1. x to the 1 less than 10, so x
to the ninth, plus what's the derivative of any constant? Right, it's 0. You could almost do this
constant as some number times x to the 0. And if you took the derivative,
well you multiply the 0 times c and you get 0. Well, you might get minus
1 depending on how you're doing it. But that's actually kind of
an interesting question. OK I'll stop digressing. But you get a 0 here, and if
you simplify that, that just equals 3x to the minus 5
minus 7x to the third plus 3 minus x to the ninth. Think we have time for one
more problem like this. I think you probably got this. This is probably one of the
more straightforward things you'll learn in mathematics. And in future presentations
I'll give you more of an intuition of why the
antiderivative is useful. We're learning the indefinite
integral, but we could learn to use the definite integral,
which we'll learn in a couple of presentations to figure out
things like the area under curve, or the volume of
a rotational figure. Well I don't confuse
you too much. Let's do one more problem. I won't make this one as hairy. So the integral of negative
1/2x to the minus 3 plus 7x to the fifth. Let's start with this
term of the polynomial. We raise the exponent one,
so x to the minus 2 now, right, because we added
one to negative 3. And then we multiply 1 over
this new exponent times the old coefficient. And actually I'll write
out all the steps. So the old coefficient
is minus 1/2. So this is a minus 2. Minus 2 so we multiply
it times minus 1/2. Let me switch colors back. Plus we raise the exponent by
one, x to the sixth, and we multiply the old coefficient
times 1 over the new coefficient, times 1/6. And so what's the answer? Well what's minus 1/2
times minus 1/2? Well that's positive
1/4 x to the minus 2. Oh, and of course, plus c. As you can tell, this is
my main source of missing points on calculus quizzes. 1/4 x to the minus 2 plus
7/6 x to the sixth plus c. There you go. And if you wanted to take the
derivative, minus 2 times 1/4 is minus 2/4 which is minus
1/2 x to the minus 3. And then 6 times 7/6 is 7x. And then you decrease
the exponent by one, x to the fifth. And the derivative of
our constant is 0. And then we get our
original expression. Hopefully at this point you're
pretty comfortable taking a derivative of a polynomial, and
then given a polynomial you can actually take the
antiderivative, go the other way. And never forget to
do your plus c. And I hope you understand why
we have to put that constant there, because when you take an
antiderivative, you don't know whether the original thing that
you the derivative of I guess had a constant there, because
the constant's derivative is 0. Hopefully I confused you
with that last statement. I'll see you in the next
presentation and I'll show you how to reverse the chain rule. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Indefinite Integration (part III)
Welcome back. Well I'm now going to do a
presentation on how to essentially invert the chain
rule or reverse the chain rule, because we're doing
integration, which is the opposite of taking
the derivative. So let's just take a
review of what the chain rule told us before. If I were to take the
derivative of f of g of x hopefully this doesn't
confuse you too much. I'll give another example
with a concrete f of x and a concrete g of x. If I want to take the
derivative of that, the chain rule just says the derivative
of this composite function is just the derivative of
the inside function. g prime of x times the
derivative of the outer, or kind of the parent function,
but still having g of x in at times. f prime of g of x. I know this might seem
complicated if you aren't too comfortable with this type of
notation, but done in kind of an example form it
makes a lot of sense. If I said what is the
derivative of let's say sin of x squared. Well in this situation, f
of x is sin of x, right? And then g of x is
x squared, right? And sin of x squared is
essentially f of g of x. And this review of chain rule. You could go watch the video on
the chain rule as well, but I don't mind doing a couple
of problems here. All this is saying that the
derivative of this is you take the derivative of the inside
function g of x in this example, which is 2x and you
multiply it times the derivative of the
outer function or the parent function. And we memorize I guess that
the derivative of sin of x is cosine of x, so it's
times cosine of g of x. So we keep the x squared there. If it confuses you, just
think about the inside and the outside function. If you take the derivative of
kind of this composite function, it's the same thing
that equals the derivative of the inside function, which is
2x times the derivative of the outside function. But we keep this inside
function in it, and we keep this x right there. So that's a review
of the chain rule. So what happens if we want
to reverse the chain rule? Well if we wanted to reverse
it, we're essentially saying that we want to take the
integral of something where we have the derivative of kind of
the inner function, and then we have the derivative of a
larger composite function. I'm just rewriting the chain
rule, but I'm writing in an integral form that this
is equal to f of g of x. This statement up here is
the exact same thing as the statement down here. All I did is I took the
integral of both sides. I'm saying the integral
of this is equal to the integral of this right here. I probably shouldn't switched
equal signs like that with you, but let's use
this formula I guess. But all you have to know is
this the reverse of the chain rule to solve some problems. Image invert colors. Let me rewrite that. The integral if I have g
prime of x times f prime of g of x dx, then that is
equal to f of g of x. This is just the chain
rule in reverse. And I know it's very
complicated sometimes when you have it in this notation,
but I'll give you a couple of examples. What if I had the integral of
let's say this is actually one that's often kind of viewed
as a trick, but you'll see it's actually not that
tricky of a trick. OK. So let's say I have the natural
log squared over x dx. And if you saw an integral
like this, you'd probably be daunted, and you'd be
surprised, many people well into college calculus courses
are still daunted by this problem. But all you have to
recognize is this is the reverse chain rule. Why is this the
reverse chain rule? Well, this is the same thing as
the integral of 1/x times the natural log whoops, this
should be nlx, right the natural log of x squared dx. These are the same thing,
I just took the 1/x out. Now this might look
a little familiar. Well, what's the derivative
of the natural log of x? If you remember from
the derivative module, it's 1/x, right? Let me write that down
in the corner here. The derivative of the natural
log of x is equal to 1/x. So right here we have
the derivative of the natural log of x. So now we can just say that we
could essentially treat this natural log of x as kind
of a variable by itself. And essentially what I'm
going to be doing if I could actually substitute for. Actually let's do that. Well no, no, no I don't do that
now, that'll confuse you. Although my flip-flopping
is probably confusing you even more. I have the derivative of the
natural log of x, so I can then say well I have the derivative
there, so this is a composite function. This is essentially
f prime of g of x. So then I can say well
that integral must be equal to this thing. This is something
squared, right? So what's the integral
of something squared? Well the integral of
something squared is 1/3. That's something to
the third power. We learned in the previous
indefinite integral module, right? And then it's 1/3 something to
the third power, and then we know from the chain rule that
something is the ln of x. And I don't know if I've
already forgotten to do it once, but don't forget
to do the plus c. Now you say, Sal, this
completely confused me, because it probably did. And if it completely confused
you, let's just take the derivative of this and I think
you'll see it happening the other way around and it
might make a little sense. When you take the derivative,
we just use the chain rule. You take the derivative
of the inside first. The derivative of the inside is
1/x and you multiply that times the derivative of the outside
function, and then you keep the inside the same. So the derivative of the
outside function is 3 times it coefficient, so it's 3 times
1/3 times the whole thing to one less exponent. So the whole thing is ln of x. And then of course
plus 0, right. The derivative of c is 0. Well this is just equal
3, 3 cancel out. This is equal to 1/x times
the ln of x squared, which is our original problem. Let me do another problem
because I probably started off with something a
little bit too hard. What is the integral of
let's say sin of x to the third power dx. That's often written like this. That's often written
like sin of x. Same thing, but I like to
think of it this way because it's not a new notation. Actually this is a mistake. Clearly I'm making up these
problems on the fly. Actually I don't
want to do that. That is the wrong problem. I want to take the integral
and actually you can see kind of how I'm thinking about these
problems I'm going to take the integral of cosine of x
times the sin of x to the third power dx. Well, we have this kind of more
complicated part, the sin of x, and we have the derivative sin
of x because we learned the derivative sin of
x is cosine of x. So if we have a function inside
of a larger composite function, and we have it's derivative, we
can just treat this function as kind of like a single entity. Like if this was just one
variable and then we take integral of it. So this just equal to sin of x
and we raise this one more power to the fourth and
we multiply times 1/4. And how did we do that? Because we know that the
integral of say x to the fourth dx is equal to I mean x to
the third dx is equal to 1/4 x to the fourth. Instead of an x we
had a sin here. And remember the reason why we
did that is because the derivative of the sin function
is sitting right here. In the next presentation, I'll
show you why this can also be done using substitution, or
why they're the same thing. I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Indefinite Integration (part IV)
Welcome back. In the last presentation, I
showed you how to essentially reverse the chain rule when
you're doing an integral. And you could also do this
by integral, it's called integration by substitution. And I'll show you why. And this is essentially just
a reverse of the chain rule. The last problem we did in that
last video, I said, sine of x to the third power times cosine
of x, and I took the integral of the whole thing. And I did it kind of, you know,
just telling you that, well, we're just reversing
the chain rule. So we see the derivative of the
sine x here, right, which is cosine of x, so we can just
treat sine of x like a variable and take its integral. And I said that that is
equal to sine of x to the fourth, times 1/4. Right? And the reason why we could
just treat the sine of x like it's just like kind of a
variable instead of a function, is because we had its
derivative sitting right here. And if you keep doing it back
and forth between the chain rule and what I just did, I
think it'll make a lot of sense. So this might have been
a little confusing. So I'll show you a technique
called integration by substitution, which
is essentially the exact same thing. So let's start with this exact
same integral here, and let's pretend like we don't
know the answer. We say, well, we have a
function and its derivative, so let me let u equal the function
that we have the derivative of. Right? u is equal to sine of x, right? u is sine of x. Well, what's the
derivative of u? du, dx. Well, we know what
du dx is, right? du of dx is equal
to cosine of x. We memorized that, and maybe
in a future presentation I'll actually prove it to you. So what we can now do is
substitute these 2 things into this integral. So the integral now becomes,
instead of writing sine of x to the third power, we can
write u to the third power. And what's cosine of x? Well, we just showed, cosine
of x is just du dx, right? So it's times du dx, and then
we have times dx, right? And I know you're probably not
too comfortable with the differentials at this point,
but they behave in just the way regular numbers do
with a fraction. So this dx and this dx actually
do cancel out, and you're left with, that this is equal to the
integral of u to the third du. And now this is an
easy integral. The only thing different than
what you might have seen recently is that instead of
an x, we have a u here. And while we know that the
answer of this integral, this is equal to 1/4 u to the
fourth, and then, of course, we should add the plus c. Are we done? Well, I mean, almost, but it
would be nice to just take that u, and unwind it, and put the
sine of x back in for it. So let's do that. So u is the sine of x. That's what we said
at the beginning. 1/4 sine of x to the
fourth, plus c. Done. Actually, this might be an
easier way to think about these type of integrals than what I
did in the last presentation. But you know, every now and
then you have to bear with me. I do things in the wrong order. Let's do a couple more
problems like this. Let's take the integral of 2x
plus 3 times x squared plus 3x plus 15 to the fifth power dx. That looks complicated
to you, doesn't it? Well, just like we said, this
is a pattern, like we saw in the previous examples. We have this expression here,
x squared plus 3x plus 15, and well, what's the
derivative of this? x squared plus 3x plus 15? Well, it's 2x plus 3, right? Notice that I'm engineering it
so it works cleanly, but most textbooks and tests
tend to do that. So let's make the substitution. Because we have a u that we
can use, and then we have its derivative, right? So we can say u is equal to x
squared plus 3x plus 15, and we can say then, the derivative of
u, we know the derivative of u is 2x plus 3, right? Because the derivative
of 15 is 0. So now we can make
our substitutions. I'm just going to switch
the orders of these two around, no different. So this is just u to
the fifth, right? Because this is this. So this is just u to the fifth. And then this is du dx
times du dx, right? I just switched the orders. And then I multiply
that times dx. And these cancel. And I know you're not
completely comfortable yet with even this integration notation,
why is this dx sitting there in the first place, but when we do
the definite integrals it will make more sense. But this is just equal to the
integral of u to the fifth du. And the integral of this,
well, this is easy. This is just equal to 1/6 u
to the sixth, right, plus c. And now we can
just unwind this. I'll do it up here to
make it extra messy. This is just equal to 1/6 times
u, which is this right here, right, we just set u to equal
this expression, 1/6 x squared plus 3x plus 15. All of this to the
sixth power, plus c. Let's do one more. I think we have
time for one more. Image, clear image,
image, invert. OK. I will also switch colors, just
to keep things interesting. Let's take the integral
of e to the x times e to the x to the fifth. I keep using that. Let's say to the
minus third power. dx. Well, once again, we have this
expression e to the x, and what's the derivative
of e to the x? Well, the derivative of e to
the x, as we learned, which is one of these things that
amazes me, is e to the x. Actually, that's one definition
for e, is number which, when it's raised to the x power,
it's the derivative of the same expression. But anyway, I don't want
to confuse you too much. But we can say then that u is
equal to e to the x, and we know that du dx is equal to e
to the x as well, which is, once again, mind blowing. So if we rewrite this top
integral, this is just equal to, I won't switch this time. So this is du dx, right? du dx times u to
the minus 3 dx. And I know what you're
thinking, Sal. Well, du dx is e to the x. u is also e to the x. Why didn't I substitute
it the other way around? Why didn't I say this? Why didn't I say that this one
is u, and why didn't I say this one is du dx to the minus 3? Well, as you can see, this
would have been useless, right? Because then I can't multiply
it times a dx, and it gets all confusing. And actually, I just realized,
I constructed a very silly problem for you, because you
could simplify this before even doing it with substitution. But we'll continue doing
it with substitution. But anyway, you see, if you did
it in this way, it becomes very complicated, so we don't
want to do it like that. So this, as we see, simplifies
to the integral of u to the minus 3 du, and that
that equals, let's see. You raise exponent 1 minus 1/2
u to the minus two, and that's the same thing as minus 1/2 e
to the x to the minus 2, or we could view that as minus 1/2
e to the minus 2x, and of course, plus c at the end. Now why was my problem
that I gave you silly? Well, I could have simplified
this before even doing the substitution, right? I could have said that that's
the same thing as the integral of e to the x times e to the
minus three x dx, which is the same thing as the integral
of e to the minus 2x dx. And actually, it's good that it
by substitution, because this probably wouldn't have been
completely intuitive for you to do just yet, as well. But anyway, that's
integration by substitution. I might do another presentation
where I do slightly harder problems, using this
same technique. I'll see you soon. 

Transcript for: Indefinite Integration (part V)
I'm not going to do
a presentation on a type of integral. I guess if you have this in
your tool kit and actually you have it beyond the exam on
this type of integral, and you actually keep it and you retain
it, then you, I think, will become an integration jock. But anyway, let me show you
what I'm talking about. So let's just remember
what the product rule of differentiation was. So let's say I had two
functions, let's say f of x times g of x, and I wanted to
take the derivative of this. f of x times g of x. Well the chain rule just told
us that this is just the same thing as, let's say, the
derivative of the first function f prime of x times the
second function g of x plus now the first function f of x times
the derivative of the second function. And I'll show you where I'm
going with this in a second. Now, if we were to integrate
both sides of this equation, because we're still doing
algebra on some levels, anything you do to one side
of the equation, you can do to the other. So if we were to integrate both
sides well if you integrate this side, you're taking the
integral of a derivative, you just get back to what you took
the derivative originally of, so this just becomes f of x
times g of x, and then we have to integrate the right hand
side, well that just becomes and we're doing the indefinite
integral, kind of the antiderivative, but we can
use this tool when we do definite integrals as well. So that's the integral of f
prime of x g of x dx plus the integral of f of x
g prime of x d of x. And now this might seem a
little bit arbitrary, and it is a little bit arbitrary, let me
take well, I could take either of these but let me
just take this one and move it to this side of the equation. So I'm going to subtract
this term from both sides of this equation. And so, we could say this so
let me change colors, because this could get confusing this
term right here, we could say that term f of x g prime of x d
of x is equal to this term let me switch back to the
yellow is equal to f of x g of x minus this term. Because I put it onto this
side of the equation. So what did I just do? It looks like I just well, I
am just essentially playing with the product rule
from differentiation. That's all I did. And you probably wondering,
well, Sal, this is all nice and it looks fancy, but what
good is this going to do me? Well, what I essentially just
did is I kind of proved this you could call this a formula,
but I often forget it, especially once I haven't done
it a long time, and then I actually just reprove it to
myself just by remembering the product rule but this is
called integration by parts. And I'll show you
where this is useful. Let's say we want to take
the indefinite integral of x cosine of x d of x. Well, everything we have in our
integration tool kit so far I don't think help
us here, right? Because we don't have a
function and its derivative, so we can't do substitution or
which is the same thing as the reverse chain rule this
isn't a simple polynomial. So if you encounter this when
you're doing integrals, kind of the last tool kit and this is
pretty sophisticated is to do integration by parts. And so how can we use this
for integration by parts? Well, integration by parts
tells us that if we have an integral where we have a
function and then the derivative of another function,
then we could use this formula to hopefully simplify it. So what I'm going to do and
you might view this as, well, Sal, how did you
know to do this? And I'll tell you my thought
process actually after I show you what I did. We always, in math in general,
you always want to simplify. You always want to move from
something that's complicated to something that's simpler. So in this situation, we could
assume that x is f of x, and we could assume that g prime of x
is cosine of x, or we could assume the other way around. The reason why I'm going to
assume that x is f of x, and I'm going to assume g prime of
x is cosine of x, is because later we want to take the
derivative of f of x. The derivative of f of x
simplifies things a lot. And we also want to take the
integral of g prime of x. We want to take the
antiderivative of g prime of x. And the antiderivative of
cosine of x is sine of x, which is just as complicated. It's not making it any
more complicated. And actually, try it the other
way around, and you'll see that if you took the antiderivative
of x, you would get something that's more complicated. You get x squared over 2. So that's the intuition, and
let me just solve through it, and hopefully it'll make
a little bit more sense. So if I assume that f of x is
x, and g prime of x is cosine of x, then f of x this yellow
term, let me write it in yellow, just for fun so f of
x so I'm saying that f of x is x. So that's x. And let's say g of x is
cosine of x, right? I'm sorry, g prime of
x is cosine of x. So the derivative of g
of x is cosine of x. So what's g of x? It was the antiderivative
of cosine of x. So that's sine of x. I hope you understand
what I'm saying. This can be a little confusing. Let me write it
separately here. Actually, well I'm running out
of space, but I'll write it in the corner right down here. See, I'm saying that f of x
is x and I'm saying that g of x is sine of x. And the reason why I knew g of
x is sine of x is because I said the derivative, I said g
prime of x, is cosine of x. So you know, if the function
if the derivative of a function is cosine, then we know the
function itself is sine. That's just something
you memorize. I haven't proven it to you yet,
but it's usually in the inside cover of your calculus book. But let's just move forward. And then this is minus
the integral of the derivative of f of x. Well what's the
derivative of f of x? Well, we said f of
x is x, right? So the derivative is
just 1 times g of x. Well, I already said that
g of x is sine of x. And I think you would agree
that we've now simplified this a good bit, because this is
just the integral of sine of x, right? So this is just equal to x sine
of x this is just this first term right here minus and
what's the integral of sine of x? Well, the derivative of well,
let me make it even simpler. Well we can make this a minus,
we can make this a minus sign of x and make this a plus. And now it's really easy. What's the antiderivative
of minus sine of x? We can ignore this 1. What's the antiderivative
of minus sine of x? Well, yeah, it's
just cosine of x. And we should never
forget the plus c. So we just used the product
rule to derive this formula for integration by parts, and in a
lot of calculus books they do this u and v and dvd. This is the same exact thing. I like this more, because
it naturally makes more sense to me. It's easier for me to read,
and I can derive at any time, just from the product rule. So I don't have to
necessarily memorize it. You might want to memorize it
for the exam, because it's faster for when you
take the AP exam. But when you do calculus it's
been about fifteen years since I learned it and I just
remember integration by parts is just really a derivation of
the product rule, and that gets me back to the format. I don't even have
to look it up. And then I can use it. So that's an introduction
to integration by parts. In the next presentation, I
will do a bunch of examples well, as many as I can fit in
to ten minutes of actually using integration by parts to
solve fairly fancy integrals. I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Integration by Parts (part 6 of Indefinite Integration)
Welcome back. Well I'm now going to do just a
bunch of integration by parts problems, as many as I can do
in ten minutes without confusing you. So let me just write the
formula for integration by parts, and if you ever forget
it I mean, it doesn't hurt to memorize it, but if you ever
forget it you just really have to just derive it from the
product rule of differentiation. But it just says that if we
have an integral of f of x times g prime of x so if you
see, within the integral, sign, one function and then you see
the derivative of another function, and I think with
practice integration by parts is really a bit of an art. It's not systematic that's g
prime of x that equals f of access times g of x this is
how it's the product rule in reverse minus the integral of
the derivative of the first function, f prime of x,
times the second function. And it kind of easy to
memorize, because there's this symmetry to the formula. So let's see if we
can apply this. And really, once you know that
you should use integration by parts, I think you'll find that
it's not that hard to do it. The hard part is to recognize
when you should use integration by parts. From my point of view, it's
kind of my last resort, or once you have a lot of practice, you
might recognize, well, if there's an e to the x in it, or
if there's a trig function in it, and I can't do the reverse
chain rule or integration by substitution, then integration
by parts is probably my best option, assuming I'm seeing
this on an exam and not in real life. In real life, it might be an
unsolvable integral, and you'd have to use a computer
or some other technique. But if you're seeing it on an
exam, you know it's a solvable integral, and if you can't
solve it any other way, it's probably integration by parts. But let's just do
some problems. Let's say I want to take the
integral of x squared e to dx. So if I saw this out of the
blue, and I didn't know that this was a presentation on the
integration by parts, I would first clearly this isn't a
polynomial, so I can't just do a simple polynomial
antiderivative. Then I would try to see, is
there the derivative of something, of one function, of
kind of a composite function here so I can do the
reverse chain rule. The derivative of x here is 1,
so I can't do anything here. So I use the chain rule. And the way I think about
the chain rule is I want to simplify it. So when I go into this term
right here, I'm going to have to pick up my f of x. I have to pick my f of x out
of probably one of these two functions, so that the f
prime of x is simpler. And I need to pick my g prime
of x, I would guess that either x squared is going to be my g
prime of x, or e to the x is going to be my g prime of x,
and I want to pick that so that when I take the antiderivative
of it, it's going to be simpler. Or at least, not
more complicated. I know that if I take the
derivative of x squared, that simplifies it. And I also know that the and
once again, this is one of my, to me, a very mind blowing
idea but that the antiderivative of e to
the x is e to the x. So it's probably a good idea to
say that f of x is equal to it's probably, let me change
colors it's probably a good idea to make f of x is equal to
x squared, because later I'm going to take the derivative of
it, and the derivative of it simplifies it, and it's
probably a good idea to make g prime of x e to the x, because
later, I'm going to take the antiderivative of it, and the
antiderivative of e to the x is e to the x. It's not going to become
any more complicated. So if we assume what I'm doing
is right, then what did we say? Well here, we just multiply the
two real functions, right? So when I say the real
functions, I mean not the derivatives of
e to one of them. So f of x, we're saying
f of x is x squared. Let me try to stay
color consistent. And we said g of x now don't
get confused we're saying g prime of x let me write it in
a corner down here we're saying that g prime of x
is equal to e to the x. And of course, if g prime of x
is equal to ex, then g of x is also equal to e to the x. So g of x I don't want you
to think that I'm somehow putting g prime of x here. I've taken the antiderivative,
it just happens to be the same function. And then from that, we subtract
the integral, we take the derivative of x squared, so you
get 2x, and then times the antiderivative of g prime of x. Well, the g prime of x is
e to the x, you take the antiderivative, it's
still e to the x. Actually I should probably stay
at least keep the colors kind of consistent, so you know
what I'm hopefully doing. The example using e to the x
might be a little complicated, because it's hard to tell
whether I've taken the derivative or not. And you can kind of keep
reverting back to the top formula if you get confused. So it looks like I've
simplified it a little bit. This integral looks easier to
solve than this integral. But once again, when I look
at this, I'm like, well, how do I solve this? I can't use the integration by
substitution, because there's not an embedded function and
then I have the derivative of it sitting right
next to it, so. Maybe I need to do
integration by parts again. So let's do that. So let's say let me do it
separately let's assume I think you getting a little bit
of the hang of it along the same vein, that this is f of x,
that this is f of x, and that this is g prime of x now. We're kind of doing
integration by parts within integration by parts. So if that is the case, that
this integral is going to equal because we have the
minus sign out front, this minus sign out front this
integral is going to equal f of x times g of x where
f of x is just 2x. Our g of x, this is
g prime of x now. Remember, we're kind of doing
a new problem within the original big problem. So this is g prime of x, but
g of x is still just e of x. I took the
antiderivative of it. And that's minus the integral
of the derivative of the first function. That prime of x. So that's just 2. And then the antiderivative
of the second function. Well, that's easy. The antiderivative of e to
the x is just e to the x. Interesting. Now I think you see
where we're going. This is actually let me
write out the whole thing. Because this is x
squared, e to the x. Just so we don't lose track
of our original problem. Interesting. Now I think we have an
integral that is pretty straightforward to solve. Don't want to forget my dx's. What's the integral of we
could take this 2 out of this, and I think it becomes
pretty obvious what's the integral of e to the x? This is a scratch-out,
this says dex. Just so and it's
a little messy. I don't like this color. Magenta. Well the integral of e to the
x, or the antiderivative of e to the x is e to the x, right? So let's write that. So I'm going to rewrite
everything we've done it. So there's x squared e to the x
minus 2xe to the x, and then this minus, you distribute it
so it becomes a plus, so then it's plus 2 I just took the
minus, I multiplied it times this minus, so I got a plus 2
and then the antiderivative of e to the x is just e to the x. And then of course, we should
never forget the plus c. Pretty fancy, no? We've figured out the
antiderivative, the indefinite integral of x squared e to the
x is this big fancy thing. I bet you, before listening to
this video, you would never imagine that you could tackle
integration like this. You could actually try x to
the n times e to the x. You can try x to the
tenth times e to the x. It actually turns out you'll
just have to do this many many many many times, but every time
you do integration by parts, that the exponent on the x-term
just becomes smaller and smaller and smaller until you
get to something that's really easy to integrate, and then you
can do it, and you'll have kind of this big long expression. It might be tedious, it might
be hairy, but at least you have a tool kit or you have
something in your tool kit that you can tackle integral
problems like this. I'll probably do one more video
on integration by parts, just because I think this is one of
the harder concepts to really grasp and feel comfortable
with, and then I'll try to do a bunch of examples. Maybe not soon, but in the
next couple of weeks, on just a lot of integration. And I'm going to mix it up so
that hopefully you can get a sense of how I try to figure
out which of my integration tools I should use for a
certain problem when I see the problem. See you in the next
presentation. 

Transcript for: Indefinite Integration (part 7)
I'm now going to do it
integration by parts problems. I think it's just a fun problem
to see because one, it's the example a lot of people use,
sometimes even a trick problem that's given on a really hard
math exam, or if you go to calculus competitions like
I used to in high school. Not to make myself too I was
actually not that geeky as a high school student, but I have
to admit, I was a mathlete. But anyway, this is just a fun
integration by parts problem because you actually never have
to evaluate the final integral. So let's say we want to
take the integral it's a bit of a classic. I wouldn't be surprised if your
math teacher does the same problem for you, just to show
you integration by parts. Let's take the integral of e to
the x you probably never heard of someone call a math
problem a classic, but hopefully I will instill in you
this love for mathematics and you will also consider this
to be a classic problem. e to the x times cosine of x. I think you might already see
where I'm going with this, because these are both fun
functions, because e to the x you can take the derivative,
you could take the anti-derivative and it
still stays e to the x. Cosine of x you take the
derivative, you go to minus sign of x, you take the
derivative again then you to minus cosine of x, then you
take the derivative again then you get a plus sign of x. It's like this cycle. The same thing happens when
you take the anti-derivative. It's not as cool as e to the x,
it doesn't stay exactly the same, but it kind of cycles. If you take two
anti-derivatives you get back to the negative of itself. And if you take two
derivatives, you get back to the negative of itself. It's also a pretty cool
function and I think you can start to see how integration
by parts might be cool here. Whenever I do integration by
parts I always like to assume that this is the g prime of x. That e to the x is g prime
of x, because e to the x literally doesn't change. Although we could do this
problem the other way. Maybe I'll experiment
doing it the other way. but let's assume this is
g prime of x, and let's assume this f of x. So this is derivative. So integration by parts, as we
take the original functions, g of x and f of x. If this is g prime of
x, what's go of x. What's the anti-derivative
of e to the x. It's just use e to the x. I'm going to switch colors,
I don't like this blue. So this is g of x. I actually took the
anti-derivative of it, but it's the same exact thing. And then times f of x. Then I want to subtract
the indefinite integral of f prime of x. One, g of x. This is the same as this, which
are both the anti-derivative of this, although they
are all the same. So this is g of x and then I
would take the derivative of f of x. f prime of x. What's the derivative
of cosine of x? It's minus sine of x. So sine of x d x, it's
minus sine of x. I could put the minus here,
that'll make it look messy, I could put the minus here
that'll make it messy or I could just put minus here and
make these minuses cancel out and I get a plus here. So I get the integral of e to
the x cosine of x d x is equal to e to the x cosine of x plus
the integral of e to the x sine of x d x. Hopefully I haven't
confused you too much. I should actually do some
integration by parts problems without e to the x. It's very hard to keep track
of what I've done here. This is the anti-derivative. This is the anti-derivative
and this is also the anti-derivative. This is g prime of
x, this is g of x. So once again we are not
clear whether we've made any progress. We've gone from e to the x cosine of
x to e to the x sine of x. Let's take integration by parts
again, see what happens. I'm just going to write on the
right side of the equal sign, because this might
get a little long. I'm just going to write this
first part x to the x cosine of x plus and now let's do
integration by parts again. For this round of integration
by parts this was g of x, but now, for this around, I'm going
to assume it's g prime of x. Which doesn't really make a
difference because whenever I take the anti-derivative of it
to g of x, it stays the same. And then I'm going to assume
that this is f of x. So integration by parts tells
us we take f of x times g of x, so I take this function and the
anti-derivative of this function. The anti-derivative of this
function is once again just e to the x and then f times that
function unchanged time sine of x. From that I subtract the
integral of the anti-derivative of this or I take g of x which
is e to the x, and then the derivative of f of
x, f prime of x. What's the derivative
of sine of x? It's cosine of x. Cosine of x d of x. Let's see if we're
getting anywhere. It seems like I just keep
adding terms, making it more and more complicated. In order to see if we're
getting anywhere, let me just rewrite the whole thing and
maybe get rid of these parenthesis, because it's
just a plus, so we can get rid of the parenthesis. Let me use a new color. OK. So this is the original
problem, e to the x cosine of x d x equals, and now let me
switch back to this color, it equals e to the x cosine of x,
and then I can just this parentheses doesn't matter
because I'm just adding everything in the parentheses
e to x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of x minus e to
the x cosine x access d x. Now you might think that I
arbitrarily switched colors here when I rewrote this,
but if you look you might see why I actually did
switch colors here. See anything interesting? Exactly. This is the same thing as
this, just a minus right? So we're going to do something
what I think to be fairly cool. Let's add this term to both
sides of the equation. Let's take this and
let's put it on to this side of the equation. If I take this and put
it on this side of the equation, what happens? I then have two of these on the
left side equation, so that becomes I mean I could write
it out it's e to the x cosine of x d x plus, right? Because I'm taking this and I'm
putting it on that side of the equation, e to the
x cosine of x d x. That's just the same thing as
2 times the integral of e to the x cosine of x d x. And then that equals this term. Which equals e to the x cosine
of x plus e to the x sine of x. I know it's really messy. All I have to do now to solve
this integral is divide both sides by 2 and I'm done. So let me write it out, this
is very exciting, it's the home stretch. If I divide both sides by 2, I
get and I'm going to try to write it so you can see
everything e to the x cosine of x d x equals and on that
side I have e to the x cosine of x plus e to the x
sine of x over 2. I think that's pretty neat. It's neat how integration by
parts allowed us to do this. We actually never even have
to evaluate this integral. We said, this integral is just
the original problem again. And you can think about
why that happened, right? Because these trick
functions cycle. So we had to do integration
by parts twice to get back to where we were before. And then we use that to solve
it without actually having to evaluate the integral. And what I also think is cool
is even if you just look at this solution, it's
kind of neat, right? The anti-derivative of e to the
x and actually never forget the plus c, that would've given
me minus 1 point on the exam. What's kind of cool, the
integral of e to the x cosine of x is this expression that's
e to the x cosine of x plus e to the x sine of
x divided by 2. It's the average of e to
the x cosine of x and e to the x sine of x. I think that's a pretty neat
property, and you might want to graph them and play with
them, but it's kind of neat. Hopefully I have convinced you
that is a classic of a problem, and you also find it neat, and
I'll see you in the next presentation. 

Transcript for: Another u-subsitution example
Evan from Norway has asked me
to do another u substitution problem, and I like these
because it gets my momentum going for doing other things
that maybe take a little bit more preparation. And the problem he sent me
and I hope I pronounced his name right was the indefinite
integral of sin of x over the cosine of x squared dx. This it also be written as he
wrote it in email, so I don't know how he exactly saw it, but
it can also be written as sin of x over cosine squared of x. Sometimes it's
written like that. Either way, I like looking
at this a bit better. It's a little bit
less ambiguous. But in general you know to do u
substitution, or integration by substitution when you see
something and you see its derivative sitting there. Right. You're like wow, this cosine of
x was just an x, or if it was just a u, this would be a
really easy integral to do. We know how to do
this integral. Let me do it on the side. This integral would be easy. 1 over x squared dx. We know how to do that. That would just be the
antiderivative of x squared. This is the same thing as the
antiderivative of x to the minus 2 dx, and we know how to
take the antiderivative of something like that. You increase the exponent by
1 and then you multiply by what your new exponent is. So it would be minus
x I'm sorry. You increase your exponent by
1, and then you divide by whatever your new exponent is. So you would,
[? let me do the, ?] increasing the exponent x to
the minus 2, you'd increase the exponent, you'd
get x to the minus 1. And then when you divide this
by minus 1 you get this minus out front, and then of course
you'd have the plus c. If you don't believe it
take the derivative. Negative 1 times minus 1. That's a positive. And then you'd decrease
the exponent by 1, you get x to the minus 2. So if we could get it in
a form that looks like this, we'd be all set. And you kind of do
see a pattern. Where this x is you have a
cosine there, and then we have cosines derivative there. So that's the big clue that we
should be using u substitution. So let's do that. And what we're going to do is
we're going to substitute u for cosine of x. So if we say u is equal to
cosine of x, and let's take the derivative of u
with respect to x. So du/dx is equal to what? What's the derivative of
cosine of x? it's not quite sin of x, right? It's minus sin of x. And then we can multiply both
sides by dx, and you get du is equal to minus sin of x dx. I just multiplied
both sides by dx. And then up here we
have sin of x dx. We don't have minus
sin of x dx. There we have sin of x dx. We could have rewritten this
top integral, we could have rewritten it like this. Sin of x dx. All of that over
cosine of x squared. So if we want to substitute for
this, here we have a minus. Let's multiply both sides of
this by a negative 1, and you get minus du is equal
to sin of x dx. And let's see. So let's rewrite this
original problem. Now I know I'm running
out of space. Let me rewrite it. So we know that u is equal to
cosine of x, so let's do that. So now this integral becomes
and the denominator, instead of cosine of x squared,
u is cosine of x. That's u, right? We made that definition. So that's over u squared. Cosine of x becomes u. And then sin of x dx right up
there, what is that equal to? Well we just solved
for it here. That's equal to minus du. Sin of x dx is
equal to minus du. So that we can replace
with this, minus du. And then of course this has
the exact same form as this thing right here. You could rewrite this,
this is equal to let's say minus 1 over u squared du. I'm just writing it a
bunch of different ways. Whatever is easier for
you to conceptualize. The same thing as minus
u to the minus 2 du. And then here we do the same
thing we did up here, although now we have a minus out front,
that actually makes it a little bit cleaner. To take the antiderivative, we
raise u it was to the minus 2 power, let's raise it to 1
power higher than that so minus 2 plus 1 is minus 1. So it's u to the minus 1 power,
and then you want to divide by minus 1, and I'll do
it explicitly here. Minus one. And then you had this negative
that was sitting out there before, so that negative is
still going to be there. And of course you're
going to have a plus c. You can view this as a negative
1 or, this negative divided by a negative, they're
going to cancel out. And so you're just left with u
to the minus 1 plus c, or 1 over u plus c is the
antiderivative oh sorry, we're not done yet. That's just the
antiderivative of this. And now we have our
substitution to deal with. What was our substitution
that we started with? u is equal to cosine of x. So if u is equal to cosine of
x, this thing is equal to 1 over cosine of x plus c is
equal to the antiderivative of our original problem, which was
sin of x over cosine of x squared dx. There you go. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Introduction to definite integrals
Welcome back. In this presentation, I
actually want to show you how we can use the antiderivative
to figure out the area under a curve. Actually I'm going to focus
more a little bit more on the intuition. So let actually use an
example from physics. I'll use distance and velocity. And actually this could be a
good review for derivatives, or actually an application
of derivatives. So let's say that I
described the position of something moving. Let's say it's x. Let's say that x is equal to,
I don't know, 16t squared. Right? So s is distance. Let me write this
in the corner. I don't know why the
convention is to use s as the variable for distance. One would think, well actually,
I know, why won't they use d? Because d is the letter used
for differential, I guess. So s is equal to distance,
and then t is equal to time. So this is just a formula that
tells us the position, kind of how far has something
gone, after x many, let's say, seconds, right? So after like, 4 seconds, we
would have gone, let's say the distance is in feet,
this is in seconds. After 4 seconds, we would
have gone 256 feet. That's all that says. And let me graph that as well. Graph it. That's a horrible line. Have to use the line tool,
might have better luck. It's slightly better. Actually, let me undo that too,
because I just want to do it for positive t, right? Because you can't really
go back in time. For the purposes of this
lecture, you can't go back in time. So that'll have to do. So this curve will essentially
just be a parabola, right? It'll look something like this. So actually, if you
look at it, I mean you could just eyeball it. The object, every second you
go, it's going a little bit further, right? So it's actually accelerating. And so what if we wanted to
figure out what the velocity of this object, right? This is, let's see, this
is d, this is t, right? And this is, I don't know
if it's clear, but this is kind of 1/2 a parabola. So this is the
distance function. What would the velocity be? Well the velocity is
just, what's velocity? It's distance divided
by time, right? And since this velocity
is always changing, we want to figure out the
instantaneous velocity. And that's actually one of the
initial uses of what made derivatives so useful. So we want to find the change,
the instantaneous change with respect to time of
this formula, right? Because this is the
distance formula. So if we know the instant rate
of change of distance with respect to time, we'll
know the velocity, right? So ds, dt, is equal to? So what's the derivative here? It's 32t, right? And this is the velocity. Maybe I should switch back
to, let me write that, v equals velocity. I don't know why I switched
colors, but I'll stick with the yellow. So let's graph this function. This will actually be a fairly
straightforward graph to draw. It's pretty straight. And then we draw the x-axis. I'm doing pretty good. OK. So this, I'll draw it in
red, this is this going to be a line, right? 32t it's a line with slope 32. So it's actually a
pretty steep line. I won't draw it that steep
because I'm going to use this for an illustration. So this is the velocity. This is velocity. This is that graph, and
this is distance, right? So in case you hadn't learned
already, and maybe I'll do a whole presentation on kind of
using calculus for physics, and using derivatives for physics. But if you have to distance
formula, it's derivative is just velocity. And I guess if you view
it the other way, if you have the velocity, it's
antiderivative is distance. Although you won't know
where, at what position, the object started. In this case, the object
started at position of 0, but it could be, you know,
at any constant, right? You could have started
here and then curved up. But anyway, let's just
assume we started at 0. So the derivative of distance
is velocity, the antiderivative of velocity is distance. Keep that in mind. Well let's look at this. Let's assume that we were
only given this graph. And we said, you know,
this is the graph of the velocity of some object. And we want to figure out what
the distance is after, you know, t seconds, right? So this is the t-axis, this
is the velocity axis, right? So let's say we were only given
this, and let's say we didn't know that the antiderivative of
the velocity function is the distance function. How would we figure out, how
would we figure out what the distance would be
at any given time? Well let's think about it. If we have a constant, this
red is kind of bloody. Let me switch to
something more pleasant. If we have, over any small
period of time, right, or if we have a constant velocity, when
you have a constant velocity, distance is just velocity
times time, right? So let's say we had
a very small time fragment here, right? I'll draw it big, but let's
say this time fragment it is really small. And let's called this very
small time fragment, let call this delta t, or dt actually. The way I've used dt is like,
it's like a change in time that's unbelievably
small, right? So it's like almost
instantaneous, but not quite. Or you can actually view
it as instantaneous. So this is how much
time goes by. You can kind of view this as
a very small change in time. So if we have a very small
change of time, and over that very small change in time,
we have a roughly constant velocity, let's say the roughly
constant velocity is this. Right, this is the velocity, so
say we had over this very small change in time, we have this
roughly constant velocity that's on this graph. Actually, let me
take do it here. We have this roughly
constant velocity. So the distance that the object
travels over the small time would be the small time
times the velocity, right? It would be whatever the value
of this red line is, times the width of this distance, right? So what's another way? Visually I kind of did
it ahead of time, but what's happening here? If I take this change in time,
right, which is kind of the base of this rectangle, and I
multiply it times the velocity which is really just the height
of this rectangle, what have I figured out? Well I figured out the area
of this rectangle, right? Right, the velocity this
moment, times the change in time at this moment, is
nothing but the area of this very skinny rectangle. Skinny and tall, right? It's almost infinitely skinny,
but it's, we're assuming for these purposes it has some very
notional amount of width. So there we figured out the
area of this column, right? Well, if we wanted to figure
out the distance that you travel after, let's say, you
know, I don't know, let's say t, let's say t sub
nought, right? This is just a particular t. After t sub nought
seconds, right? Well then, all we would have to
do is, we would have to just figure, we would just do
a bunch of dt's, right? You'd do another one here,
you'd figure out the area of this column, you'd figure out
the area of this column, the area of this column, right? Because each of these areas
of each of these columns represents the distance
that the object travels over that dt, right? So if you wanted to know how
far you traveled after t sub zero seconds, you'd essentially
get, or an approximation would be, the sum of all
of these areas. And as you got more and more,
as you made the dt's smaller and smaller, skinnier,
skinnier, skinnier. And you had more and more and
more and more of these rectangles, then your
approximation will get pretty close to, well, two things. It'll get pretty close to, as
you can imagine, the area under this curve, or
in this case a line. But it would also get you
pretty much the exact amount of distance you've traveled
after t sub nought seconds. So I think I'm running into the
ten minute wall, so I'm just going to pause here, and I'm
going to continue this in the next presentation. 

Transcript for: Definite integrals (part II)
Welcome back. So where I left off, we said
that we had this, I guess you could call it, equation or this
function, although I didn't write it with the function
notation, where I said, the distance is equal to 16 t
squared, and I graphed it, it's like a parabola, right,
for positive time. And then we said, well, the
velocity, if we know the distance, the velocity is just
the change of the distance with respect to time. It's just, the velocity is
always changing, you can't just take the slope, you
actually have to take the derivative, right? So we took the derivative with
respect to time of this function, or this equation, and
we got 32t, and this is the velocity. And then we graphed it. And then I asked a question. I was like, well, we want to
figure out, if we were given this, if we were given just
this, and I asked you, what is the distance that this object
travels after time, you know, after 10 seconds? Let's, you know, let's say this
t0 is equal to 10 seconds. I want to know how far is this
thing gone after 10 seconds. And let's say you didn't know
that you could just take the antiderivative, let's say we
didn't know this at all, and let's say you didn't know that
you could just take the antiderivative, because we just
showed that, you know, the derivative of distance is
velocity, so the antiderivative of velocity is distance. So let's say you couldn't just
take the antiderivative. What's a way that you could
start to try to approximate how far you've traveled
after, say, 10 seconds? Well [? as I said, ?] you graph this, and you say,
let's assume over some change in time, velocity is
roughly constant, right? Let's say velocity
is right here. So you could approximate how
far you travel over that small change in time by multiplying
that change in time, let's say that's like, you know, a
millionth of a second, times the velocity at roughly that
time, or maybe even the average velocity over that time, and
you'd get the distance you've traveled over that very small
fraction of time, right? But if you look at it visually,
that also happens to be the area of this rectangle, right? And what we said, is if you
want to know how far you travel after 10 seconds, you just draw
a bunch of these rectangles, and you sum up the area, right? And you could imagine, and you
don't have to imagine, it's actually true, the smaller the
bases of these rectangles, and the more of these rectangles
you have, the more accurate your approximation will be,
and you'll approach 2 things. You'll approach the area under
this curve, right, almost the exact area under this curve,
and you'd also get almost the exact value of the distance
after, say, 10 seconds in this case, right? But 10 didn't have to
be an exact number. It could have been a variable. So this is something
pretty interesting. All of a sudden, we see
that the antiderivative is pretty darn similar to
the area under the curve. And it actually turns out
that they're the same thing. And this is where I'm
going to teach you the indefinite integral. So the indefinite integral, I
don't know how comfortable you are with summation, I remember
the first time l learned calculus, I wasn't that
comfortable with summation, but it's really, all the indefinite
integral, is is you can kind of view it as a sum, right? So now, you'll maybe understand
a little bit more why this symbol looks kind
of like a sigma. That's actually how I view it. And please look it up so
you can see properly drawn integrals. But in this case, the
indefinite integral is just saying, well, I'm going to take
the sum from t equals 0, right, so from t equals 0, to let's
say in this example, t equals 10, right, because I said 10. From t equals 0 to t equals 10. and I'm going to take the sum
of each of the heights, the height at any given point,
which is the velocity. And then, what's the
formula for the velocity? It's 32t and then I'm at
times the base at each of these rectangles, dt. And so this is the
definite integral. The definite integral is
literally, and they never do this in math texts, and that's
what always kind of confused me, is that you can kind of
view it like a sum, like this. It's kind of the sum of each of
these rectangles, but it's the limit, as if these were
discrete rectangles, you could just do a sum, and you could
make the rectangle bases smaller and smaller, and have
more and more rectangles, and just do a regular sum. And actually, that's how, if
you ever write a computer program to approximate an
integral, or approximate the area under a curve, that's
the way a computer program would actually do it. But the actual indefinite
integral says, well, this is a sum, but it's the limit as the
bases of these rectangles get smaller and smaller and smaller
and smaller, and we have more and more and more of
these rectangles. So as these dt's approach 0,
the number of rectangles actually approach infinity. So I'm actually going to, I'll
do that more rigorously later, but I think it's very important
to get this intuitive feel of just what an integral is. It isn't just this voodoo
that happens to be there. But anyway, so going
back to the problem. So the integral from this
is now a definite integral, extending from t equals
0 to t equals 10. This tells us 2 things. This tells us the area of the
curve from t equals zero to t equals 10, right, it tells us
this whole area, and it also tells us how far the object
has gone after 10 seconds. Right? So it's very interesting. The indefinite integral
tells us 2 things. It tells us area, and it also
tells us the antiderivative. Right? We're already familiar with
it as an antiderivative. So let me give you
another example. Actually, maybe I'll stick
with this example, but I'll clear it a bit. Actually, maybe I should erase. Erasing might be a good
option with this one, since it's fairly messy. I think you know all
this stuff now. I just need space. Maybe, OK, so we have that
indefinite integral. And we could actually
figure it out, too. I mean, well, after t
seconds, [UNINTELLIGIBLE]. So and the way you evaluate an
indefinite integral, and let me show you that first, is that
you figure out the integral. So let me just say, let
me continue with the problem, actually. As you can tell, I don't plan
much for these presentations. So the way you figure out the
indefinite integral, is you say, and sometimes they won't
write t equals 0 to t equals t. They'll just say from
0 to 10 of 32t dt. Right? And the way you evaluate
this, is you figure out the antiderivative, and you really
don't have to do the plus c here, so the antiderivative, we
know, is 16t squared, right? It's one half t
squared times 32. So that's 16t squared. And we evaluate this at ten,
and we evaluate it at 0, and then we subtract
the difference. So we evaluate this at 10,
so 16 times 100, right? That's evaluated at 10,
and then we subtract it, evaluate at 0. So 16 times 0 is 0. So after 10 seconds, we
would have gone 1600 feet. And also, the area under
this curve is 1600. So let's use this to do
a couple more examples. And actually, I want to show
you why we do this subtraction. Actually, I'm going to
do that right now. Let me clear it. Oh, that's ugly. I'll now do it more
general, actually. Let me draw this twice,
once for the distance, and once for its derivative. So let's say that the distance,
yeah, well, let's just say it looks something like this. Let's say you start at some
distance, and then it goes off like that. Right? So let's say we call
this distance b. Well, let's just call this,
you know, I don't know, 5. Right? We start at 5 feet, and then
we moved forward from there. And this axis is of course
time, this axis, maybe I shouldn't do 5, because
it looks so much like s. That's 5, 5 feet. And this is the s,
or distance, axis. And actually, I just
looked at the clock. I'm running out of time. So let me continue this in
the next presentation. 

Transcript for: Definite Integrals (area under a curve) (part III)
Welcome back. I'm just continuing on with
hopefully giving you, one, how to actually solve indefinite
integrals and also giving you a sense of why you solve
it the way you do. And I think that's often
missing in some textbooks. But anyway, let's say that this
is the distance and let me give you a formula, actually, for
the distance, just for fun. Oh, my phone is ringing. Let me lower the volume,
because you're more important. So, let's say that the
distance, s  this time I'll write it as a function  let's
say the distance is  I said it started at five, so let's
say it's 2t  let's say this is actually a cubic function. You're not only accelerating,
your rate of acceleration is increasing. I think, actually, the rate
of acceleration, if I'm not mistaken, is actually called
jerk, but I might have to Wikipedia that. Let's say its 2t to
the third plus 5. And let's say I wanted to know
how far I travel between t equals 2 seconds and
t equals 5 seconds. Right? I'm not looking for the total
distance I've traveled. I just want to know how far do
I travel between time equals 2 seconds and time
equal 5 seconds. Right? So this might be
2 and this is 5. So an easy way to do that is
I could just evaluate this function at t equals 5  let
me use a different color. I think it's getting messy 
I could just evaluate this function at t equals 5. If t equals 5, 5 to the third
power is 125, 250, it's 255, so the object has gone 255
feet at t equals 5, right? And then, at time equals 2,
the object has gone how far? 2 to the third is 8. 16. It's gone 21 feet. Right? To figure out how far I
travelled between time equals 2 and time equals 5, I just say s
of 5 minus s of 2, right? How far did I go after 5
seconds minus how far I already was after 2 seconds. And this is just 255 minus
21 and that's, what, 234. 234 feet is how far I
travelled between 2 seconds and 5 seconds. Interesting. And I think you're starting to
get a little intuition about why we evaluated that previous
indefinite integral in the previous video the way we did. So let's actually draw the
derivative of this function. So what's the derivative? So let me just call
that v of t, I guess. v of t is just the derivative,
right, because it's the rate of change of distance
with respect to time. 3 times 2 is 6t squared and the
constant disappears, right? So it's just 6t squared. And that makes sense, right? Because your velocity doesn't
care about where you started off from, right? You're going to be the same
velocity if you started from 10 feet or if you
started from 2 feet. Your velocity doesn't really
matter about where your starting position is. So let's graph this. See? You're actually learning
a little physics while you're learning calculus. Actually, I think it's silly
that they're taught as two separate classes. I think physics and calculus
should just be one fun 2-hour class. But I'll talk about
that at another time. So, going back to this. Let me graph that. 6t squared. Well, that's just going
to look like a parabola. Right? It's going to look
something like this. This is t. This is the velocity. And now, if we just had this
velocity graph, if we didn't know all of this over
here and I asked you the same question, though. I said, how far does this
thing travel between 2 seconds and 5 seconds? Right? Well, I could do it the way
that we learned in the previous video where I draw a bunch of
small rectangles, each of a really small width, and I
multiply it times its instantaneous velocity at
that exact moment, right? And then I sum up all of those
rectangles  look how pretty that is  I sum up all
of the rectangles. And I'll get a pretty good
approximation for how far I've travelled between
2 and 5 seconds. Because remember, the area of
each of these rectangles represents how far I
traveled in that little amount of time, dt. Because time times a constant
velocity is equal to distance. But as you can see this also
tells me the area between t equals 2 and t equals 5. So, not only did I figure out
the distance between how far I traveled from 2 seconds to 5
seconds, I also figured out the area under this curve from
2 seconds to 5 seconds. So, interestingly enough, if I
just changed this from a to b, and, in general, if you want to
figure out the area under a curve from a to b, it's just
the indefinite integral from a to b  actually, from b to a. The b should be the larger one. b to a. I guess a to b, depending
on how you say it. Let me write that in a
different color because I think I'm making it messier. From a to b of this
velocity function. So, in this case, 6t
squared d t, right? If these weren't 2 and 5,
if this was just a and b. And the way you evaluate this
is you figure out the antiderivative of this inside
function, and then you evaluate the antiderivative at b,
and then from that, you subtract it out at a. So in this case, the
antiderivative of this is 2t to the third and we evaluated at
b, and we evaluated at a. Actually, let me stick
to the old numbers. We evaluated it at 5 and
you evaluated it at 2. So if you evaluated
it at 5, that's 255. If you evaluate it
at 2, that's 21. So you're doing the exact same
thing we did here when we actually had this graph. So I did all of this, not to
confuse you further, but really just to give you an intuition
of why one, why the antiderivative is the area
under the curve, and then two, why let's say that a, b and
then why we evaluate it this way. You might see this
in your books. This is just saying, if I want
to figure out the area under a curve from a to b of f of
x, that we figure out the antiderivative. This capital F is just
the antiderivative. We just figure out the
antiderivative and we evaluated at b and we evaluated at a, and
then we subtract the difference. And that's what we
did here, right? This is what we did here
intuitively when we worked with distance. The derivative and the
antiderivative don't only apply to distance and velocity. But I did this to give you an
intuition of why this works and why the antiderivative
is the area under a curve. So let me clear this up and
just rewrite that last thing I wrote, but maybe a
little bit cleaner. OK. So let's say that F of x with a
big, fat capital F is equal to  actually, let me do it a
better way  let me say that the derivative of big fat F
of x is equal to f of x. Right? I think, actually, this is the
fundamental theorem of calculus, but I don't want to
throw out things without knowing for sure. I have to go make sure. See, I haven't done
math in a long time. I'm giving you all this based
on intuition, not necessarily what I'm reading. So the derivative of big F is
small f, and all we're saying is that if we take the integral
of small f of x from a to b, dx, that this is big F, it's
antiderivative, at b minus the antiderivative at a. In the next presentation,
I'll use this. This is actually pretty easy
to use once you know how to use antiderivatives. And we did these three videos
really just to give you  or actually, is this the third or
the second  just to give you an intuition of why this is,
because I think that's really important if you're ever going
to really use calculus in your life or write a computer
program or whatever. And in the next couple videos
I'll actually apply this to a bunch of problems and you'll
hopefully see that it's a pretty straightforward
thing to actually compute. I'll see you in the
next presentation. 

Transcript for: Definite Integrals (part 4)
Welcome back. I'm now going to use definite
integrals to figure out the areas under a bunch of curves
and, if we have time, maybe even between some curves. So let me right down the
fundamental theorem of calculus. I know I covered it really fast
in the last presentation. Just to make sure you
understand this formula. The last couple presentations
were really to give you an intuition for this
exact formula. Let's say that big f prime of
x is equal to f of x, right? That's also like saying that
the  that's equivalent to saying that f of x  big f
of x  is equal to the antiderivative of
f of x, right? Well, let's just that it's one
of the possible antiderivatives of f of x, right? Because there's always a
constant term here and you're not sure whether it is. And this is why people tend to
use this standard because we know that f of x is the
derivative of big f prime of x. Big f of x is just one of the
antiderivatives of f of x. So this is a little bit
not true, but I think you get the idea. But the fundamental theorem of
calculus tells us if this top line is true, then the definite
integral from a to b of f of x d x is equal to its
antiderivative evaluated at b minus its antiderivative
evaluated at a. And I know I said here that
big f isn't the only antiderivative, right? Because you could at any
constant to this and that would also be the antiderivative. But when you subtract here, the
constants will cancel out. So it really doesn't
matter which of the constants you pick. The constant actually
doesn't matter. So that's why I actually
said the antiderivative. But let's apply this. You might be
confused right now. So let me draw a graph. There you go. Look how straight that is. Draw the x-axis. Not perfect but it'll do. Let's say that my f of x is
equal to x squared plus 1. So f of x looks like this. This is 1. So it'll start at 1. It'll just be a parabola. Let me see how good
I can draw this. I've done worse. OK. So that's f of x. It's a parabola.
y-intercept at 1. And let's say I want to figure
out the area under the curve  between the curve and,
really, the x-axis. Let's say I want to figure out
the area between the curve and the x-axis from x equals
negative 1 to, I don't know, x equals 3. So this is the area I
want to figure out. I'm going to shade it in. So this is the area. All of this stuff. I want to figure out this area. And you could imagine, before
you knew calculus, figuring out an area of something with a
curve  it's kind of top boundary. It would have been
very difficult. But we will now use the
fundamental theorem of calculus and hopefully you have an
intuition of why this works and how the integral is really just
a sum of a bunch of little, little, small squares with
infinitely small bases. But if you watched the last
videos, hopefully that hit the point home. But now we'll just mechanically
compute because, actually, understanding it is a bit
harder than just doing it. But let's just
mechanically compute it. So we are essentially just
going to figure out the integral from minus 1 to 3
of f of x, which is x squared plus 1 d x. What's the antiderivative
of x squared plus 1? This just equals the
antiderivative. So it's just x to the third 
we could say 1/3 x to the third or x to the third over
3  plus x, right? The derivative of x is 1. And then we don't have to worry
about plus c because we're going to subtract out the c's. You'll see. I think you'll get the point. It doesn't matter. You could pick an arbitrary
c right here and it'll just cancel out. And we're going to evaluate
that at 3 and negative 1 and we're going to subtract
out big f of negative 1 from big f of 3. This is just the
notation they use. You figure out the
antiderivative and you say where you're
going to evaluate it. And then this is equal to
 So if I evaluate 3. 3 to the third power is what? That's 27. 27 divided by 3 is 9. And then 9 plus 3 is 12. Right? This is just big f of 3, right? Because I figured out the
end  This is big f of x. You can kind of view
this as big f of x. But not to be confused with
small, cursive f of x. This is big f of x. So this big f of 3. And then, from that
we'll subtract big f of negative 1, right? Minus big f of negative 1. And if we put minus 1 here. Let's see, minus 1 to the
third power is minus 1. So it's minus 1/3 and then
plus minus 1, right? So minus 1/3 plus minus 1. I think that equals
minus 4/3, correct? I think so. Maybe I'm making a mistake
with negative signs. Minus 1/3 minus 4/3. And I'm going to
subtract that, right? So if I'm subtracting minus
4/3, it's the same thing as adding minus 4/3. And then we have our answer. Actually, it's 12 and 4/3
 whatever  units. Squared units. 12 and 4/3 squared units. We could write this as a
mixed number as well. Let's do another one. I'll do a slight variation. OK. Let me draw again. Some coordinates. I don't know if I'm going
to have time to do it in this video but I'll try. I always try. Let's say I have f of x is
equal to the square root of x. So it looks something
like this. That's actually a pretty nice
looking, kind of sideways parabola, I think. This is f of x. And let's say I have
another function. g of x which equals x squared. So g of x is actually going
to look something like this. Whoops! I was doing well and then
something happened. And, of course, it'll continue
on this side as well. Because it is defined
for negative numbers. But anyway, my question to you,
or my question to myself, really, is what is the
area between the curves where they intersect? What is this? What is this area? Well, the first thing you have
to figure out is just what are the boundary points? What is this point? And what is this point? Well this point, I
think, is pretty clear. It's 0, 0, right? They both intersect at 0, 0. And even this point, you could
probably do it from intuition. But if you don't, I guess, want
to do it through intuition, you could just set these 2
equations equal to each other, right? You could say x squared
is equal to the square root of x, right? And then you could do
a bunch of things. You could square both sides or
 well, actually, this is the same thing as doing
it by intuition. But I think it's pretty obvious
that the only places where x squared is equal to the square
root of x are the points x equals 0, which you already
know, and x equals 1. So this is the point 1, 1. Which is true for both of them. And this is more algebra,
so I won't go into that in too much detail. I'm kind of running
out of time. So we want to figure out the
area between these 2 curves. So what we can do is  maybe
you want to pause it and think about it yourself  we
can figure out the area under the grey curve. We could figure out this area. So we want to figure out 
this is a boundary, right? Between 0 and 1. We could figure out this area
and then we could figure out the entire area under the green
curve separately and then we could subtract the difference. Which is exactly how we're
going to do it in the next video because I have
run out of time. 

Transcript for: Definite Integrals (part 5)
Welcome back. Where I had just left off we
were trying to figure out this area between these two curves,
and we figured out that it's really the area between the
curves between the point 0, x equals 0 and x equals 1. And I was proposing
of a way to do it. Let's figure out the entire
area under the square root of x from 0 to 1, and we can
subtract from that, this purple area, which is the
area under x squared. So just based on the last
example we did, we could just write the indefinite integral,
and I'm not going to rewrite the fundamental theorem from
calculus, because I think you know that by now. Let me do it in a loud color. Magenta. So I want to know the
larger area, right. The area under just
the square root of x. That's Kind of like
the combined area. Well that's just from 0 to 1,
the integral of square root of x, because square root of x
is the green function, dx. And I want to subtract from
that the area from 0 to 1 what's under x squared. x squared dx. And I just want
to make a point. This could have just been
rewritten this way. You could just rewrite a new
function, which is the difference of these two
functions, and it would have been equivalent. You could have said this. This isn't kind of a step of
the problem, but you could have done it this way. In fact, some people
start this way. See those are the same thing
as the integral from 0 to 1 of square root of x
minus x squared dx. So you could do this two
separate problems, two separate indefinite integrals, or
you could do it as one indefinite integral. Actually that might be even
simpler because when you evaluate it from 1 to 0 it
simplify things a little bit. So let's stick with
the second one. So first of all we just have
to figure out what the antiderivative of this
inner expression is. So you haven't seen
square root of x yet. Do you think you
know how to do it? Well, I think you do. Let's say that equals square
root of x is just x to the 1/2 power, right? So we just use the same
antiderivative rules we've always used. We raise it one more power
so it becomes x to the 3/2. Right, it was 1/2,
we added 1 to it. And then we divide by
this new exponent. So dividing by a fraction
is like multiplying by its reciprocal. So it's 2/3 x to the 3/2 and
then minus I think the second term is pretty easy for you
minus 1/3 x to the third. That's the antiderivative
of minus x squared, minus 1/3 x to the third. And we're going to have to
evaluate this thing at 0 and 1 and subtract the difference. Subtract this expression
evaluated at 0 from this expression evaluated at 1. I think I'm running
out of space. What happens when x equals 1? 1 to the 3/2 is 1. 1 to the third is 1. So it's 2/3 minus 1/3. Well that's easy. It's 1/3. I just put 1 in for x. And then when x is equal to 0
what is this expression equal? Well that's easy too. That's 0. So there you go. 1/3 minus 0 or 1/3. That's kind of neat. You know I find is this of
exciting because if just my intuition I was like, oh I have
these two curves, and I mean they do intersect at the nice
integer number, but you know what it's probably going to be
some really messy number of what the areas between
these two curves, right. Who knows, maybe it'll involve
some you know a circle involves pi, which is this
really messy number, so maybe all curves have these
kind of messy areas. But this one it's just one of
those neat things about math. The area between the square
root of x and x squared is 1/3, which is a pretty clean number. Actually let me do one more
problem since I have time. It's a bit of a trick problem. I mean, you might actually find
this easy, but let's figure out the area between f of x
is equal to I don't know, x to the fifth. I'm going to do
something simple. Let me draw it actually. OK, I'm going to
draw the x-axis. x to the fifth is going
to go up super fast, something like that. It's going to go up real fast. Let's say I wanted to figure
out the areas this side's going to go real fast too
between that, and instead of figuring out the area between
x-axis and that, f of x, I want to figure out the area between
f of x and Instead of figuring out this
bottom area, right? Like the normal problems we've
done, we would figure out this type of area, you know,
between two points. Let's say I want to figure out
the area inside of the curve where the height here is 32. So I want to figure out this
area inside the curve. How do we do that? Well one way we could do it is
just like we did the last one, we can figure out some function
that's essentially a line, a horizontal line that goes
straight across here. And we'll essentially just
be figuring out the area between the two functions. So what's a function that's
a line that just goes straight at y equals 32? I think I just gave
you the answer. Exactly. Let me stick with
that greenish color. So we could say g of
x is equal to 32. It's just a constant function. It just goes straight across. And then we need to figure out
what the area is between the two, so we need to figure out
what are these two points. So when does x to
the fifth equal 32? I mean you could solve it
algebraically, you know, you could say x to
the fifth equals 32. x is equal to 2, and
actually, you know what? I made a mistake. Let's say that this is not
equal to x to the fifth. Let's say that f of x is
equal to x to the absolute value of x to the fifth. Because the mistake, obviously
x to the fifth is not a parabola looking thing.
x to the fifth goes negative like this. But I have committed so much to
this cup shape that I'll make it the absolute value
of x to the fifth. So if I say the absolute value
of x to the fifth is equal to 32, I think you see where
I realized my mistake. But if I say the absolute value
of x to the fifth is 32, there's two places
where that's true. It's x is equal to
plus or minus 2. These are the two points. I should have done something
with an even exponent so I could have had this cup shape,
but anyway the absolute value solved my problem. So what is this area? We know it's between negative
2 and 2, so we just set up the indefinite integral. It's the indefinite integral
for minus 2 to 2 of the top function, the top boundary, 32,
minus the bottom boundary. Well, this will be a little bit
tricky, but minus the absolute value of x to the fifth dx. And actually instead of doing
this, I think you could see that there's symmetry here,
so we could just figure out this area and multiply by 2. This problem's a little hairy,
just because I had a bad choice of initial function. Not exactly what I wanted,
but we'll work on forward. So instead of doing that, let's
do the integral from 0 to 2 of 32 minus x to the fifth dx. And then multiply that by 2. So what is that? That's 32x minus x to
the sixth over 6. And we're going to evaluate it
from 2 and 0 at 64 minus 64/6. 2 to the sixth is 64, and
then 32 times 0 is 0 and the next is 6, that's 0, so the
answer is 64 minus 64/6. I'm about to run out of time. That's just a fraction
problem there. Oh, and that's half
of it, right? So we want to
multiply that by 2. So if we multiply that by
2, we get 128 minus 128/6. I haven't figured
out what it is. Well I guess we could
figure it out. It's 128 times 1 minus
1/6 or 128 times 5/6. And I don't know what that is. I can multiply if I wanted to,
but I have 10 seconds left so I'll leave you there. Hope I didn't confuse you. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Definite integral with substitution
So I've been sent this definite
integral problem and it seemed as good as any, and I think the
key with this is just to see a lot of examples. So let's do it. This definite integral is from
pi over 2 to pi of minus cosine squared of x times sin of x dx. So before we just chug
through the math and do the antiderivatives and use the
fundamental theorem of calculus to evaluate the definite
integral, let's think about what we're even doing. So I've graphed this function
right here, minus cosine squared of x times sin of x. And what we care about,
we're defining the definite integral between pi over 2,
which is roughly here. Let me see if I can make
this a little bit bigger. So between pi over 2 which is
right there, and between pi. So the definite integral of
this function between here and here is essentially the area of
the curve between the curve and the x-axis. And since the a curve is below
the x-axis here, this area is going to be a negative number. So that gives us
immediately an intuition. We should be getting a negative
number when we evaluate this and just to prove this I
actually typed it in up here. So let's now evaluate
this definite integral. Now I'll rearrange some of the
terms here just to make it a little bit easier to read. But the way I always think
about it is, well I have a cosine and a sin. The cosine is squared, so all
these crazy things are happening to it, so it seems
like I could use substitution or the reverse chain
rules some out here. And what was the chain rule? The chain rule said if I took
the derivative of f of g of x that this is equal to f prime
of g of x times g prime of x. That might completely confuse
you, but I just wrote that here because we could say, well what
if g of x is cosine of x. f prime of g of x is the cosine
of x squared, and then the derivative of g of x or the
derivative of cosine of x is sin of x. Well it's actually minus sin of
x, and we have a minus sin here, so that works
out well too. If this confuse you, ignore it. Well essentially we're just
going to do the same thing, but we're going to do
it with substitution. So let me do it
with substitution. Let me a erase this if
this confuses people. I want to do it however it
is least confusing to you. OK let me erase that. Actually, let me do it with
substitution, just because the way I was just doing is kind
of my shortcut back in the day when I was a mathlete. But it's good to be able to do
it with substitution, helps you from making careless mistakes. So let me rewrite
this first of all. This is the same thing as the
integral from pi over 2 to pi of cosine squared of x. Actually let me write that
as cosine of x squared. Same thing, right. Times minus sin of x dx. And now it should
be clearer to you. What's the derivative
of cosine of x? It's minus sin of x. So I have a function and it's
being squared, and I have its derivative, so I can figure out
its antiderivative by using substitution or the
reverse chain rule. So let's make a substitution. u is equal to cosine of x. How did I know to substitute
u is equal to cosine of x? Well because I say, well
the derivative of this function is here. So when I find du, this whole
thing is going to end up being du, and let me
show that to you. So what is du/dx? du/dx is equal to
minus sin of x. That hopefully we've
learned already. So what is du? If we multiply both sides by
the differential d of x get du is equal to minus sin of x dx. So if we look at the original
equation, this right here we just showed is equal to du,
and this right here is what? Cosine of x is u. That was our original
substitution. So we have u squared. So now let's take the integral. And I will arbitrarily
switch colors. And now this is a very
important thing. If you're going to do
substitution, if we're going to say u is equal to cosine of x,
we're going to have to actually make this substitution
on the boundaries. Or we could do the substitution
and reverse the substitution and then evaluate the
boundaries, but let's do that. So if this is going from x is
equal to pi over 2 to pi, what is u going from? Well when x is equal to
pi over 2, u is equal to cosine of pi over 2. Because u is just cosine of x. And then when x is pi, i is
going to be cosine of pi. And now the fun part. Cosine of x squared. Well that's just the same
thing is u squared. And minus sin of x dx,
that's the same thing is du did that here. This is pretty straightforward
and I'm just going to rewrite it. What's cosine of pi? Cosine of pi is minus 1. Cosine of pi over 2,
well that's a 0. So we have the integral from u
is equal to 0 to u is equal to negative 1 of u squared du. And now this seems like
a simple problem. So this is equal to the
antiderivative of u squared, which is
fairly straightforward. u cubed over 3. You could just take the
derivative of this, you get this. All I did is I increased this
exponent to get the third, and I divided by that exponent. Now we're going to have to
evaluate it at minus 1 and subtract from that,
it evaluated at 0. So this is equal to minus 1
to the third over 3 minus 0 over 3, and so this
is equal to minus 1/3. And we are done. And if we look at this area
from our original graph, what we just solved, as we said the
area of the curve between here and here is minus 1/3. Or if we wanted the absolute
area because you can't really have a negative area, it's 1/3
but we know it's negative because this curve is
below the x-axis here. And that looks about right,
that looks about 1/3. I mean if this cube right
here is 1, then that looks about 1/3. The intuition all
works out at least. So hopefully you found
that vaguely useful. Actually let me since we
have a little bit of time. Hopefully you understood this,
and if you did, don't worry about what I'm going to do now,
but I want to show you how I tend to do it where I
just think of it is the reverse chain rule. It's a little bit
quicker sometimes. But it's really the same
thing as what we just did with substitution. So if we erase all of this. And so if we have this integral
right here, what I do is I say, well I have cosine
of x squared. I have cosine of x squared, and
then I have minus sin of x. This is the derivative of this. Since the derivative is here,
I can just treat this whole thing like an x term. So this is the same thing. So the antiderivative is cosine
of x to the third over 3, and I evaluate it at pi
and pi over 2. And remember, how
did I do this? What allowed me to treat this
cosine of x just like an x or like a u when I did it
with the substitution? Well I had its derivative
sitting right here, minus sin of x. So that's what gave me the
license to just take the antiderivative, pretend like
this cosine of x is just an x, is just a u, you could even
say, and just take it's exponent, raise it by 1 and
divide it by 3 and then evaluate it from
pi to pi over 2. So this is equal to cosine of
pi cubed over 3 minus cosine of pi over 2 cubed over 3. This is minus 1 to the third,
so this is equal to minus 1/3 minus this is 0. So we get the same answer. I just wanted to show you that. It's exactly the same
with substitution. It's just I didn't formally do
the substitution, but it's the exact same thing. Anyway, hope you
found that helpful. 

Transcript for: Integrals: Trig Substitution 1
Let's say I have the indefinite
integral 1 over the square root of 3 minus 2x squared. Of course I have a dx there. So right when I look at
that, there's no obvious traditional method of
taking this antiderivative. I don't have the derivative of
this sitting someplace else in the integral, so I can't do
traditional u-substitution. But what I can do is I could
say, well, this almost looks like some trig identities that
I'm familiar with, so maybe I can substitute with
trig functions. So let's see if I can find
a trig identity that looks similar to this. Well, our most basic
trigonometric identity this comes from the unit circle
definition is that the sine squared of theta plus
the cosine squared of theta is equal to 1. And then if we subtract cosine
squared of theta from both sides, we get or if we
subtract sine squared of theta from both sides, we could do
either we could get cosine squared of theta is equal to 1
minus sine squared of theta. We could do either way. But this, all of a sudden, this
thing right here, starts to look a little bit like this. Maybe I can do a little bit of
algebraic manipulation to make this look a lot like that. So the first thing, I would
like to have a 1 here at least, that's how my brain
works so let's factor out a 3 out of this denominator. So this is the same thing as
the integral of 1 over the square root of let me factor
out a 3 out of this expression. 3 times 1 minus 2/3x squared. I did nothing fancy here. I just factored the 3
out of this expression, that's all I did. But the neat thing now is,
this expression looks a lot like that expression. In fact, if I substitute, if I
say that this thing right here, this 2/3x squared, if I set it
equal to sine squared theta, I will be able to use
this identity. So let's do that. Let's set 2/3x squared, let's
set that equal to sine squared of theta. So if we take the square root
of both sides of this equation, I get the square root of 2 over
the square root of 3 times x is equal to the sine of theta. If I want to solve for
x, what do I get? And, well, we're going to
have to solve for both x and for theta, so
let's do it both ways. First, let's solve for theta. If we solve for theta, you get
that theta is equal to the arcsine, or the inverse sine,
of square root of 2 over square root of 3x. That's if you solve for theta. Now, if you solve for x, you
just multiply both sides of this equation times the inverse
of this and you get x is equal to divide both sides of the
equation by this or multiply it by the inverse is equal to
the square root of 3 over the square root of 2 times
the sine of theta. And we were going to substitute
this with sine squared of theta, but we can't leave
this dx out there. We have to take the integral
with respect to d theta. So what's dx with
respect to d theta? So the derivative of x with
respect to theta is equal to square root of 3 over
square root of 2. Derivative of this with respect
to theta is just cosine of theta, and if we want to write
this in terms of dx, we could just write that dx is equal to
square root of 3 over the square root of 2 cosine
of theta d theta. Now we're ready to substitute. So we can rewrite this
expression up here I'll do it in this reddish color I was
using that, let me do it in the blue color. We can rewrite this
expression up here now. It's an indefinite integral
of dx is on the numerator, right? Instead of writing this 1
times dx, I could have just written a dx up here. That could be a dx
just like that. You're just multiplying
it times dx. So what's dx? dx is this business. I'll do it in yellow. dx is this right here. So it's the square root of
3 over the square root of 2 cosine theta d theta. That's what dx was. Now, the denominator in my
equation, I have the square root of 3 times
now it's 1 minus. Now I said 2/3x squared is
equal to sine squared of theta. Now how can I simplify this? Well, what's 1 minus
sine squared of theta? That's cosine squared of theta. So this thing right here is
cosine squared of theta. So my indefinite integral
becomes the square root of 3 over the square root of 2
cosine theta d theta, all of that over the square root of
3 times the cosine squared of theta. That just became cosine
squared of theta. So let's just take the square
root of this bottom part. So this is going to be equal
to I'll do an arbitrary change of colors square root
of 3 over the square root of 2 cosine of theta d theta, all of
that over what's the square root of this? It's equal to the square root
of 3 times the square root of cosine squared, so
times cosine of theta. Now, this simplifies
things a good bit. I have a cosine of theta
divided by a cosine of theta, those cancel out, so we'll just
get 1, and then I have a square root of 3 up here divided by a
square root of 3, so those two guys are going to cancel out,
so my integral simplifies nicely to 1 over square
root of 2 d theta. Or even better, I could write
this this is just a constant term, I could take it out of my
integral it equals 1 over the square root of 2 times my
integral of just d theta. And this is super easy. This is equal to 1 over
the square root of 2 times theta plus c. Plus some constant. I mean, you could say that the
integral of this is theta plus c and then you'd multiply the
constant times this, but it's still going to be some
arbitrary constant. I think you know how to take
the antiderivative of this. But are we done? Well, no. We want to know our indefinite
integral in terms of x. So now we have to
reverse substitute. So what is theta? We figured that out here. theta
is equal to arcsine the square root of 2 over the
square root of 3x. So our original indefinite
integral, which was all of this silliness up here, now that I
reverse substitute for theta or put x back in there, it's 1
over the square root of 2 times theta. theta is just this, is just
arcsine of square root of 2 over square root of 3 x, and
then I have this constant out here, plus c. So this right here is
the antiderivative of 1 over the square root
of 3 minus 2x squared. So hopefully you
found that helpful. I'm going to do a couple of
more videos where we go through a bunch of these examples,
just so that you get familiar with them. 

Transcript for: Integrals: Trig Substitution 2
Let's say we have the
indefinite integral of 1 over 36 plus x squared d x. Now, as you can imagine, this
is not an easy integral to solve without trigonometry. I can't do u substitution, I
don't have the derivative of this thing sitting someplace. This would be easy if I
had a 2x sitting there. Than I would say, oh the
derivative of this is 2x, I could do u substitution
and I'd be set. But there is no 2x there,
so how do I do it? Well, I resort to our
trigonometric identities. Let's see what trig
identity we can get here. The first thing I always do,
this is just the way my brain works, I always like it I can
see this is a constant plus something squared, which
tells me I should use a trigonometric identity. But I always like it in terms
of 1 plus something squared. I'm just going to rewrite my
integral as being equal to, let me write the dx
in the numerator. This is just times dx. Let me write a nicer
integral than that. This is equal to the integral
of d x over 36 times 1 plus x squared over 36. 1 plus x squared over 36,
that's another way to write my integral. Let's see if any of our trig
identities can somehow be substituted in here for
that that would somehow simplify the problem. So the one that springs to
mind, and if you don't know this already, I'll write it
down right here, is 1 plus tangent squared of theta. Let's prove this one. Tangent squared of theta, this
is equal to 1 plus just the definition of tangent sine
squared of theta over cosine squared of theta. Now 1 is just cosine squared
over cosine squared. So I can rewrite this as equal
to cosine squared of theta over cosine squared of theta, that's
1, plus sine squared theta over cosine squared of theta,
now that we have a common denominator. Now what's cosine squared
plus sine squared? Definition of the unit circle. That equals 1 over cosine
squared of theta. Or we could say that that
equals 1 over cosine squared. One over cosine is secant. So this is equal to the
secant squared of theta. If we make the substitution, if
we say let's make this thing right here equal to tangent of
theta, or tangent squared of theta. Then this expression will be 1
plus tangent squared of theta. Which is equal to
secant squared. Maybe that'll help simplify
this equation a bit. We're going to say that x
squared over 36 is equal to tangent squared of theta. Let's take the square root of
both sides of this equation and you get x over 6 is equal to
the tangent of theta, or that x is equal to 6 tangent of theta. If we take the derivative of
both sides of this with respect to theta we get d x d theta is
equal to what's the derivative of the
tangent of theta? I could show it to you just
by going from these basic principles right here. Actually let me do it
for you just in case. So the derivative of tangent
theta never hurts to do it on the side, let me
do it right here. It's going to be 6 times the
derivative with respect to theta of tangent of theta. Which we need to figure,
so let's figure it out. The derivative of tangent of
theta, that's the same thing as d d theta of sine of
theta over cosine of theta. That's just the
derivative of tangent. Or this is just the same thing
as the derivative with respect to theta, let me scroll to
the right a little bit. Because I never remember the
quotient rule, I've told you in the past that it's somewhat
lame, of sine of theta times cosine of theta to
the minus 1 power. What is this equal to? We could say it's equal to,
well the derivative of the first expression or the first
function we could say, which is just cosine of theta. This is equal to cosine of
theta, that's just the derivative of sine of theta
times our second expression. Times cosine of theta
to the minus 1. I've put these parentheses, and
put the minus 1 out there because I didn't want to put
the minus 1 here and make you think that I'm talking about an
inverse cosine or an arccosine. So that's the derivative of
sine times cosine and now I want to take plus the
derivative of cosine. Not just cosine, the derivative
if cosine to the minus 1. So that is minus 1 times cosine
to the minus 2 power of theta. That's the derivative of
the outside times the derivative of the inside. Let me scroll over more. So that's the derivative
of the outside. If the cosine theta was just an
x, you would say x to the minus 1 derivative is minus
1 x to the minus 2. Now times the derivative
of the inside. Of cosine of theta with
respect to theta. So that's times minus
sine of theta. I'm going to multiply all of
that times sine of theta. The derivative of this thing,
which is the stuff in green, times the first expression. So what does this equal? These cosine of theta
divided by cosine of theta, that is equal to 1. And then I have a minus 1 and
I have a minus sine of theta. That's plus plus. What do I have? I have sine squared, sine of
theta time sine of theta over cosine squared. So plus sine squares of theta
over cosine squared of theta. Which is equal to 1 plus
tangent squared of theta. What's 1 plus tangent
squared of theta? I just showed you that. That's equal to secant
squared of theta. So the derivative of tangent
of theta is equal to secant squared of theta. All that work to get us
fairly something it's nice when it comes out simple. So d x d theta, this is
just equal to secant squared of theta. If we want to figure out what d
x is equal to, d x is equal to just both sides times d theta. So it's 6 times secant
squared theta d theta. That's our d x. Of course, in the future
we're going to have to back substitute, so we want
to solve for theta. That's fairly straightforward. Just take the arctangent of
both sides of this equation. You get that the arctangent of
x over 6 is equal to the theta. We'll save this for later. So what is our
integral reduced to? Our integral now becomes
the integral of d x? What's d x? It is 6 secant squared
theta d theta. All of that over this
denominator, which is 36 times 1 plus tangent
squared of theta. We know that this right there
is secant squared of theta. I've shown you that
multiple times. So this is secant squared of
theta in the denominator. We have a secant squared on the
numerator, they cancel out. So those cancel out. So are integral reduces to,
lucky for us, 6/36 which is just 1/6 d theta. Which is equal to
1/6 theta plus c. Now we back substitute
using this result. Theta is equal to
arctangent x over 6. The anti-derivative 1 over
36 plus x squared is equal to 1/6 times theta. Theta's just equal to the
arctangent x over 6 plus c. And we're done. So that one wasn't too bad. 

Transcript for: Integrals: Trig Substitution 3 (long problem)
Let's say we have the
indefinite integral of the square root of 6x minus
x squared minus 5. And obviously this is not
some simple integral. I don't have just, you know,
this expression and its derivative lying around, so
u-substitution won't work. And so you can guess from just
the title of this video that we're going to have to
do something fancier. And we'll probably have to do
some type of trig substitution. But this immediately doesn't
look kind of amenable to trig substitution. I like to do trig substitution
when I see kind of a 1 minus x squared under a radical sign,
or maybe an x squared minus 1 under a radical sign, or
maybe a x squared plus 1. These are the type of things
that get my brain thinking in terms of trig substitution. but that doesn't quite
look like that just yet. I have a radical sign. I have some x squared, but it
doesn't look like this form. So let's if we can get
it to be in this form. Let me delete these guys
right there real fast. So let's see if we can maybe
complete the square down here. So let's see. If this is equal to,
let me rewrite this. And if this completing the
square doesn't look familiar to you, I have a whole
bunch of videos on that. Let me rewrite this as equal to
minus 5 minus I need more space up here minus
5 minus x squared. Now there's a plus 6x, but
I have a minus out here. So minus 6 x, right? A minus and a minus
will becomes plus 6x. And then, I want to make
this into a perfect square. So what number when I add it
to itself will be minus 6? Well, it's minus 3
and minus 3 squared. So you take half of this
number, you get minus 3, and you square it. Then you put a 9 there. Now, I can't just
arbitrarily add nines. Or actually, I didn't
add a 9 here. What did I do? I subtracted a 9. Because I threw a 9 there, but
it's really a minus 9, because of this minus sign out there. So in order to make this
neutral to my 9 that I just threw in there,
this is a minus 9. I have to add a 9. So let me add a 9. So plus 9, right there. If this doesn't make complete
sense, what I just did, and obviously you have the dx right
there, multiply this out. You get minus x squared plus
6x, which are these two terms right there, minus 9, and then
you'll have this plus 9, and these two will cancel out, and
you'll just get exactly back to what we had before. Because I want you to realize,
I didn't change the equation. This is a minus 9
because of this. So I added a 9, so I
really added 0 to it. But what this does, it gets
it into a form that I like. Obviously this, right here,
just becomes a 4, and then this term right here becomes, what? That is x minus 3 squared. x minus 3 squared. So my indefinite integral now
becomes the integral, I'm just doing a little bit of algebra,
the integral of the square root of 4 minus x minus
3 squared dx. Now this is starting to look
like a form that I like, but I like to have a 1 here. So let's factor a 4 out. So this is equal to, I'll
switch colors, that's equal to the integral of the radical,
and we'll have the 4, times 1 minus x minus 3 squared over 4. I just took a 4 out of
both of these terms. If I multiply this out, I'll
just get back to that, right there, dx. And now this is starting to
look like a form that I like. Let me simplify it even more. So this is equal to the
integral, if I take the 4 out, it becomes 2 times the square
root of 1 minus, and I can rewrite this as x minus 3,
let me write this way. 1 minus x minus 3
over 2 squared dx. And where did I
get that 2 from? Well, if I just square both
of these, I get x minus 3 squared over 2 squared. Which is x minus 3 over 4. So I have done no
calculus so far. I just algebraically rewrote
this indefinite integral as this indefinite integral. They are equivalent. But this, all of a sudden,
looks like a form that I recognize. I showed you in the last video
that cosine squared of theta is just equal to 1 minus
sine squared of theta. You could actually do
it the other way. You could do sine squared
is equal to 1 minus cosine squared. No difference. But they both will work out. But this looks an
awful lot like this. In fact, it would look exactly
like this if I say that that is equal to sine squared of theta. So let me make that
substitution. Let me write that x minus
3 over 2 squared is equal to sine squared of theta. Now, if we take the square root
of both sides of that equation, I get x minus 3 over 2 is
equal to sine of theta. Now we're eventually, you know
where this is going to go. We're eventually going to have
to substitute back for theta. So let's solve for
theta in terms of x. So theta in terms of x, we
could just say, just take the arc sine of both sides of this. You get theta is equal to,
right, the arc sine of the sine is just theta. Theta is equal to the arc
sine of x minus 3 over 2. Fair enough. Now, to actually do the
substitution, though, we're going to have figure out what
dx is, we're going to have to solve for x in terms of theta. So let me do that. So we get, if we multiply both
sides of the equation by 2, we get x minus 3 is equal to 2
times the sine of theta, or that x is equal to 2
sine of theta plus 3. Now, if we take the derivative
of both sides with respect to theta, we get dx d theta, is
equal to 2 cosine of theta, derivative of this is just 0. Or we can multiply both sides
by d theta, and we get dx is equal to 2 cosine
of theta d theta. And we're ready to substitute
back into our original indefinite integral. So this thing will now be
rewritten as the integral of 2 times the radical, if I can get
some space, of 1 minus, I'm replacing this with
sine squared of theta. And all that times dx. Well, I just said that dx is
equal to this, right here. So dx is equal to 2
cosine of theta d theta. What does this simplify to? This action right here, this is
just cosine squared of theta. And we're going to take
the square root of cosine squared of theta. So this, the square root of
cosine squared of data, this whole term right here, right? That becomes the square root of
cosine squared of theta, which is just the same thing
as cosine of theta. So our integral becomes, so our
integral is equal to, 2 times the square root of cosine
squared of theta, so that's just 2 times cosine of theta,
times 2 times cosine of theta. That's that one, right there. This is this, and all of
this radical sine, that's this, right there. 1 minus sine squared was cosine
squared, take the radical, you get cosine squared. And then everything
times d theta. Now this is obviously equal
to 4 times cosine squared of theta d theta. Which, by itself, is still not
an easy integral to solve. I don't know, you know, I
can't do U-substitution or anything like that, there. So what do we do? Well, we resort to our
good old trig identities. Now, I don't know if you have
this one memorized, although it tends to be in the inside cover
of most calculus books, or inside cover of
most trig books. But cosine squared of theta
can be rewritten as 1/2 times 1 plus cosine of 2 theta. And I've proven this
in multiple videos. So let's just make
this substitution. Let me just replace this
thing with that thing. So this integral becomes,
it equals, 4 times cosine squared of theta, but cosine
squared of theta is this. 4 times 1/2 times 1 plus
cosine of 2 theta d theta. Now, this looks
easier to deal with. So what is it? 4 times 1/2, that's 2. So my integral becomes the
integral of 2 times 1, so it's 2, plus 2 times 2 cosine of 2
theta, all of that d theta. Now, this antiderivative is
pretty straightforward. What is this, right here? This is the derivative
with respect of theta of sine of 2 theta, right? This whole thing. What's the derivative
sine of 2 theta? Take the derivative of the
inside, that's 2, times the derivative of the outside,
cosine of 2 theta. And this, of course, is the
derivative of 2 theta. So this is equal to, the
antiderivative of 2 with respect to theta, is just 2
theta, plus the antiderivative of this, which is just sine of
2 theta, and then we have a plus c. And of course, we can't forget
that we defined theta, our original antiderivative
was in terms of x. So we can't just leave
it in terms of theta. We're going to have to
do a back substitution. So let's just remember,
theta was equal to arc sine of x minus 3 over 2. Let me write that
on the side here. Now, if I immediately
substitute this theta straight into this, I'm going to get a
sine of 2 times arc sine of x minus 3 over 2, which
would be correct. And I would have a 2 times arc
sine of x minus 3 over 2. That would all be fine,
and we would be done. But that's not satisfying. It's not a nice clean answer. So let's see if we can simplify
this, so it's only in terms of sine of theta. So when you take the sine of
the arc sine, then it just simplifies to x minus 3 over 2. Let me make that clear. So if I can write all of this
in terms of sines of theta, because the sine of theta is
equal to the sine of the arc sine of x minus 3 over 2. Which is just equal
to x minus 3 over 2. So if I can write this in terms
of sines of theta, then I can just make this substitution. Sine of theta equals
that, and everything simplifies a good bit. So let's see if we can do that. Well, you may or may not know
the other identity, and I've proven this as well, that sine
of 2 theta, that's the same thing as sine of theta plus
theta, which is equal to sine of theta cosine of theta plus,
the thetas get swapped around, sine of theta plus cosine of
theta, which is equal to, this is just the same thing written
twice, 2 sine of theta cosine of theta. Some people have this memorized
ahead of time, and if you have to take an exam on trig
substitution, it doesn't hurt to have this memorized
ahead of time. But let's rewrite
this like this. So our indefinite integral
in terms of theta, or our antiderivative, became 2 theta,
plus, instead of sine of 2 theta, we could write, 2 sine
of theta cosine of theta, and of course we have a plus c. Now, I want to write everything
in terms of sines of theta, but I have a cosine if theta there. So what can we do? Well, we know we know that
cosine squared of theta is equal to 1 minus sine squared
of theta, or that cosine of theta is equal to the square
root of 1 minus sine squared of theta. Which seems like we're adding
complexity to it, but the neat thing is, it's in terms
of sine of theta. So let's do that. Let's make the substitution. So our antiderivative, this is
the same thing as 2 data plus 2 sine of theta times cosine of
theta, which is equal to this, times the square root of 1
minus sine squared of theta, and all of that plus c. Now we're in the home stretch. This problem was probably
harder than you thought it was going to be. We know that sine theta is
equal to x minus 3 over 2. So let's make that
reverse substitution. So we have 2 times theta. This first term is just 2
times theta, right there. So that's 2 times, we can't
escape the arc sine. If we just have a theta, we
have to say that theta is equal to arc sine of
x minus 3 over 2. And then we have plus,
let me switch colors, plus 2 sine of theta. Well, that's plus 2 times sine
of theta is x minus 3 over 2. So 2 times x minus 3 over 2,
and then all of that times the square root of 1 minus
sine of theta squared. What's sine of theta? It's x minus 3 over 2 squared. And of course we have a plus c. Let's see if we can simplify
this even more, now that we're at the home stretch. So this is equal to 2 arc sine
of x minus 3 over 2, plus these two terms, this 2 and this 2
cancel out, plus x minus 3, times the square root of, what
happens if we multiply everything here by, let's see,
if we take a, so this is equal to 1 minus x minus 3 over 4. x
minus 3 squared over 4. This simplification, I should
write that in quotes, is taking me longer than I thought. But let's see if we can
simplify this even more. If we multiply, let me just
focus on this term right here, if we multiply the outside,
or say, let's multiply and divide this by 2. So I'll write this as
so let's just multiply this times 2 over 2. You might say, Sal, why
are you doing that? Because I can rewrite this, let
me write my whole thing here. So I have 2 arc sine of x
minus 3 over 2, and then I have, I could take this
denominator 2 right here. So I say, plus x
minus 3 over 2. That 2 is that 2 right there. And then I could write
this 2 right here as a square root of 4. Times the square root
of 4, times the square root of all of this. 1 minus x minus 3
squared over 4. I think you see
where I'm going. I'm kind of reversing
everything that I did at the beginning of this problem. And maybe I'm getting a little
fixated on making this as simple as possible, but I'm
so close, so let me finish. So I get 2 times the arc sine
of x minus 3 over 2, which I'm tired of writing, plus x minus
3 over 2, and if we bring this 4 in, right, the square root of
4 times the square root of that is equal to the square root
of 4 times these things. So it's 4 minus x minus
3 squared, all of that that plus c. And we're at the home stretch. This is equal to 2 times the
arc sine of x minus 3 over 2 plus x minus 3 over 2 times the
radical of 4 minus, let's expand this, x squared
minus 6x plus 9. And then this expression right
here simplifies to minus minus, it's 6x minus x squared, and
then you have a 4 minus 9 minus 5. Which is our original
antiderivative. So finally, we're
at the very end. We get the antiderivative is 2
arc sine of x minus 3 over 2 plus x minus 3 over 2 times,
time the radical of 6x minus x squared minus 5. That right there is the
antiderivative of what this thing that we had at the very
top of my little chalkboard, which is right there. So that is equal to the
antiderivative of the square root of 6x minus
x squared minus 5 dx. And I can imagine that you're
probably as tired as I am. My hand actually hurts. But hopefully you find that
to be vaguely satisfying. Sometimes I get complaints
that I only do easy problems. Well, this was quite a hairy
and not-so-easy problem. 

Transcript for: Periodic Definite Integral
For any real number
x, let brackets around x denote the
largest integer less than or equal to x, often known as
the greatest integer function. Let f be a real valued
function defined on the interval
negative 10 to 10, including the
boundaries by f of x is equal to x minus the greatest
integer of x, if the greatest integer of x is odd, and 1
plus the greatest integer of x minus x, if the greatest
integer of x is even. Then the value of pi
squared over 10 times a definite integral
from negative 10 to 10 of f of x cosine of pi of
x dx is so before even try to attempt to
evaluate this integral, let's see if we can at least
visualize this function, f of x, right over here. So let's do our best
to visualize it. So let me draw my x-axis. And let me draw my y-axis. So let me draw my y-axis. And then let's think about what
this function will look like. So this is x is equal to
0, this is x is equal to 0, this is x is equal to 1, x is
equal to 2, x is equal to 3. We could go down to
negative 1, negative 2. We could just keep
going, if we like. Hopefully we'll see
some type of pattern, because it seems to
change from odd to even. So between 0 and 1, what is
the greatest integer of x? So let me just
write it over here. So between 0 and 1,
until you get to 1 so maybe I should do this
from including 0 until 1, the greatest integer
of x is equal to 0. If I'm at 0.5, the greatest
integer below 0.5 is 0. As I go from 1 to 2,
this brackets around x is equal to 1. It's the greatest integer. If I'm at 1.5, the
greatest integer is 1. If I'm at 1.9, the
greatest integer is 1. And then if I go to above
from between 2 and 3, then the greatest
integer is going to be 2. If I'm at 2.5, greatest
integer is going to be 2. So with that, let's
try to at least draw this function over
these intervals. So between 0 and 1, the
greatest integer is 0. 0 we can consider to be even. 0 is even, especially
if we're alternating. 1 is odd, 2 is even, 3 is odd. So 0 is even. So we would look at this
circumstance right over here, if x is even. And then over this time frame
or over this part of the x-axis, the greatest integer
of x is just 0. So the equation or the
line or the function is just going to be 1
minus x over this interval, because the greatest
integer is 0. So 1 minus x will
look like this. If this is 1, 1 minus x
just goes down like that. That's what it looks
like from 0 to 1. Now let's think about what
happens as we go from 1 to 2. As we go from 1 to 2, not
including 2 but including 1, all the way up to
2, not including it, the greatest integer is 1. The greatest integer is odd. So we use this case. And over here, we're going
to have x minus the greatest integer of x over this interval. The greatest integer of x is 1. So it's going to be
the graph of x minus 1. So x minus 1 at 1
is going to be 0. And at 2, it's
going to be 1 again. So it's going to be this. It's going to look
just like that. So this right here is x minus 1. And then this over here,
essentially was 1 minus x. And we could keep doing it. As we go from 2 to 3, the
greatest integer of x is 2. We would look at this case. So we're going to have 1 plus 2. So we're going to
have 3 here minus x. So when we start
over here when x is 2 or a little bit above that,
we're going to have 3 minus 2. We're going go to 1. It's going to be right at 1. And then as x is equal
to 3, 3 minus 3 is 0. It's going to oscillate
back down like this. I think we have an
appreciation for what this graph is
going to look like. It's going to keep going
up and down like this, with a slope of negative 1, then
positive 1, then negative 1, then positive 1. It's just going to keep doing
that over and over again. You can keep trying it
out with other intervals, but it's pretty clear
that this is the pattern. Now, what we want to do is
evaluate the integral from 10 to negative 10 of this function
times cosine of pi of x. So let's think about
cosine of pi of x and think about whether
that also is periodic. And of course, it is. And then if we can
simplify this integral so we don't have to evaluate
it over this entire period over here, maybe we can simplify
it into a simpler integral. So cosine of pi x,
cosine of 0 is 1. Don't want you to
get that wrong. Cosine pi 0 is cosine of 0. So that's 1. Cosine of pi is negative 1. So when x is equal to 1,
this becomes cosine of pi. So then the value of the
function is negative 1. It'll be over here. And then cosine of 2 pi, 2
times pi, is then 1 again. So it'll look like this. This is at 1/2. When you put it over here,
it'll become pi over 2. Cosine of pi over 2 is 0. So it'll look like this. Let me draw it as
neatly as possible. So it will look like this. Cosine, and then
it'll keep doing that, and then it'll go like this. So it is also periodic. So if we wanted to figure out
the integral of the product of these two periodic
functions from all the way from negative 10 to 10,
can we simplify that? And it looks like
it would just be, because we have this
interval, let's look at this interval over here. Let's look at just from 0 to 1. So just from 0 to 1, we're
going to take this function and take the product
of this cosine times essentially
1 minus x, and then find the area under that
curve, whatever it might be. Then when we go
from 1 to 2, when we take the product
of this and x minus 1, it's actually going to be the
same area, because these two, going from 0 to 1 and
going from 1 to 2, it's completely symmetric. You can flip it over
this line of symmetry, and both functions are
completely symmetric. So you're going to
have the same area when you take their product. So what we see is,
over every interval, when you go from 2 to 3,
first of all, the integral from 2 to 3 is
clearly the same thing as the integral from 0 to 1. Both functions look
identical over that interval. But it will also be the
same as going from 1 to 2, because it's
completely symmetric. When you take the
products of the function, that function will be completely
symmetric around this axis. So the integral
from here to here will be the same as the
integral from there to there. So with that said, we can
rewrite this thing over here. So what we want to evaluate,
pi squared over 10 times the integral from negative 10
to 10 of f of x cosine of pi x, using the logic we
just talked about. This is going to be
the same thing as being equal to pi squared over 10
times the integral from 0 to 1, but 20 times that,
because we have 20 integers between
negative 10 and 10. We have 20 intervals
of length 1. So times 20 times the
integral from 0 to 1 of f of x cosine of pi x dx. I forgot to write
the dx over there. I want to make sure
you understand, because this is really the
hard part of the problem, just realizing that the integral
over this interval is just 1/20 of the whole thing, because over
every interval, from 0 to 1, the integral is going to
evaluate to the same thing as going from 1 to 2, which
will be the same thing as going from 2 to 3, or going from
negative 2 to negative 1. So instead of doing
the whole interval from negative 10
to 10, we're just doing 20 times the
interval from 0 to 1. From negative 10 to 10, there's
a difference of 20 here. So we're multiplying by 20. And this simplifies
it a good bit. First of all, this part
over here simplifies to 20 divided by 10 is 2. So it's 2 pi squared. So it becomes 2 pi
squared that's just this part over here times
the integral from 0 to 1. Now, from 0 to 1,
what is f of x? Well, we just figured out,
from 0 to 1, f of x is just 1 minus x. f of x is just 1 minus x
from 0 to 1 times cosine of pi x, cosine of pi x dx. And now we just have to evaluate
this integral right over here. So let's do that. So 1 minus x times
cosine of pi x is the same thing as cosine of
pi x minus x cosine of pi x. Now, this right here,
well, let's just focus on taking
the antiderivative. This is pretty easy. But let's try to do
this one, because it seems a little bit
more complicated. So let's take the antiderivative
of x cosine of pi x dx. And what should jump
in your mind is, well, this isn't that simple. But if I were able to
take the derivative of x, that would simplify. It's very easy to take the
antiderivative of cosine of pi x without making
it more complicated. So maybe integration by parts. And remember,
integration by parts tells us that the integral
I'll write it up here the integral of udv is equal to
uv minus the integral of vdu. And we'll apply that here. But I've done many, many videos
where I prove this and show examples of exactly
what that means. But let's apply it
right over here. And in general,
we're going to take the derivative of
whatever the u thing is. So we want u to be
something that's simpler when I take
the derivative. And then we're going to take
the antiderivative of dv. So we want something that does
not become more complicated when I take the antiderivative. So the thing that
becomes simpler when I take this
derivative is x. So if I set u is
equal to x, then clearly du is equal to just dx. Or you say du dx is equal to 1. So du is equal to dx. And then dv is going
to be the rest of this. This whole thing over
here is going to be dv. dv is equal to cosine pi x dx. And so v would just
be the antiderivative of this with respect to x.
v is going to be equal to 1 over pi sine of pi x. If I took the derivative here,
derivative of the inside, you get a pi, times 1
over pi, cancels out. Derivative of sine of pi
x becomes cosine of pi x. So that's our u,
that's our v. This is going to be equal to u times
v. So it's equal to x, this x times this. So x over pi sine of pi x
minus the integral of v, which is 1 over pi
sine of pi x du. du is just dx. And this is pretty
straightforward. The antiderivative of sine of
pi x is 1 over pi or negative 1 over pi cosine of pi x. And you could take
the derivative if you don't believe me. You could do u substitution. But hopefully you can start
to do these in your head, especially if you're going to
take the IIT joint entrance exam. So this whole
expression is going to be, this part
over here is going to be x over pi sine of pi x. And then this over here
is going to be well, you have the antiderivative
of sine of pi x is negative 1 over
pi cosine of pi x. The negatives cancel out. So you have plus, and then
the 1 over pi times 1 over pi, 1 over pi squared
cosine of pi x. That's the antiderivative
right there. And you can verify. Derivative of cosine
of pi x is going to be negative pi sine of x. One pi will cancel out here. You get a negative sign, and
then you have sine of pi x. So this is the
antiderivative of that. And so if we want
the antiderivative of this whole thing
right over here, this is what we
care about from 0 to 1 dx, the
antiderivative of cosine pi x pretty straightforward. We've actually already
done it right over here. It is 1 over pi sine of pi x. That's this first term. And the antiderivative
of x cosine pi x is this thing over here. But we're subtracting it. So we'll put a negative
sign out front. So minus x over pi sine of pi x
minus 1 over pi squared cosine of pi x. And of course, we took
the antiderivative, but it's a definite integral. We need to evaluate
it from 0 to 1. And we don't want to forget
that 2 pi squared out front. So let's evaluate this. So the first thing, we're going
to have 1 over pi sine of 1 pi. Sine of 1 pi is 0. So you have 0 minus 1 over
pi times sine of 1 pi again. That's again 0, minus 1 over
pi squared cosine of pi, or cosine of 1 pi. Cosine of pi is negative 1. Negative 1 times negative
1 over pi squared is plus 1 over pi squared. So we've evaluated it at 1. And from that, we want to
subtract it evaluated at 0. Sine of 0 is 0 minus
this is clearly 0, because you have a 0
out front minus 0. And then you have
minus cosine of 0. Cosine of 0 is 1. So then you have a
minus 1 over pi squared. And so this term, we could
just say this is a negative. These don't matter
negative, positive, positive. And we're just left with
a 1 over pi squared plus 1 over pi squared, which is
equal to 2 over pi squared. That's what this
part evaluates to. It's 2 over pi squared. We can't forget
that we were going to multiply this whole
thing times 2 pi squared. That's this thing
out front here. And so the pi squared
cancels out the pi squared. We're left with 2 times
2, which is equal to 4. And we're done. This thing that looked
pretty complicated just evaluates out to 4. 

Transcript for: Simple Differential Equations
Welcome to the video on
the introduction to differential equations. What's a differential? Well, we've been doing things
like if I said that y is equal to, I don't know, 3x. If we took the derivative of
both sides of this equation and we said  one of the notations
we used is we said dy over dx is equal to 3. We took the derivative
of both sides of that. But this you could almost
use differential notation. dy is a differential and
dx is a differential. What does a differential mean? A differential just means an
infinitely small change in y, in this case, so that's a
differential in y, or an infinitely small change in x. So a differential it's like a
difference  when we learned slope, we said slope is change
in y over change in x. Or you could say the difference
in y over difference in x. But once we started taking the
slope of curves we had to make this difference and this
difference approach 0. That's what a differential
essentially is. A differential is a really,
really, really, really infinitely small difference. So what is a
differential equation? Well it's an equation that
involves differentials. So, for example, this is
a differential equation. This will be the first
example that we solve. dy over dx is equal
to x squared plus 1. So how do we solve this
differential equation? Well, there's a couple of
ways you could say it. You say oh, well this is the
same thing as f prime of x. You know, y to the function
of x and you just take the antiderivative of both sides. But let's solve this properly
as a differential equation. So you can actually manipulate
these differentials the same way that you would manipulate
numbers for the most part. And so what could we do here? Let's multiply both sides
of this equation by dx. So you get, for a very small
change in y, dy, you get x squared plus 1 times a very
small change in the x. Or another way to say it is for
a very small change in x, if you want to figure out how much
does y change, you multiply times x squared plus 1 wherever
you are on the curve. So what does that do for us? Well let's take the
antiderivative of both sides or let's take the
integral of both sides. And if you watched all of the
videos on integration and the definite integral and area and
a curve, you realize that an integral is essentially a sum,
it's kind of an infinite sum of a bunch of these
infinitely small dy's. So if you take the sum of
all of the changes in dy's, you're left with a y on
this side of this equation. You might want to re-watch
all the videos that we did on integration. Then what is this? This is essentially just
 this is the indefinite integral of x squared plus 1. So it's the
antiderivative of that. And what's the antiderivative
of x squared plus 1? Well it's x to the
third over 3. We're just taking the
derivative backwards. And once again, watch the
videos on the antiderivative. There's I think eight
or nine of them. Plus x and then plus c. And where does the c come from? Well we know that when we
take the derivative of a constant it goes to 0. So when you take the
antiderivative, we're like well, there could have
been a constant there. And that's where that
plus c comes from. So this is the general solution
to this differential equation. And that's something
interesting. So with traditional equations,
the solution tended to be a number, right? If I just told you y is
equal to 2y minus 1. Then you would get minus y
is equal to minus 1, you'd get y is equal to 1. So this is a traditional
equation and your solution was just a value  you
solved for the variable. Differential equations
are something different. The solution is
actually a function. You're saying what
function satisfies this differential equation. So that's something
to keep in mind. Right now we're doing very
basic differential equations, but that's something to keep in
mind the whole time you learn differential equations. I think I'll eventually do
a play list on essentially an introductory course on
differential equations that you would take at college. And that applies even when
you start doing partial differential equations,
et cetera, et cetera. The solution to a differential
equation is not a number, it is a function. So anyway, this was the
general solution to this differential equation. And if you want the particular
solution, people normally give you initial conditions or they
give you points on the function and then you can
substitute back. In this problem they said that
dy dx equals x squared plus 1. And they said that  let me
switch colors  they said that y is equal to 1 at x is equal
to 1, or y is equal to 1 when x is equal to 1. So we can use this information
now to solve for c. How do you do that? Well it says y is equal to 1. So 1 is equal to when x is
equal to 1, is equal to 1/3, right, 1 over 3, 1 to the third
power over 3, plus 1 plus c. And let's see what I can do. Subtract one from both
sides  this comes 0. Subtract 1/3 from both
sides and you get c is equal to minus 1/3. So using these conditions, a
point where this function crosses through, we can now
give you the particular solution to this
differential equation. And that is y is equal to x to
the third over 3 plus x minus 1/3, and then we just
solve for the c. And if you don't believe me,
take this expression and substitute it here and you will
see that it equals, if you were to take the derivative of y
with respect to x, you would see that it equals
x squared plus 1. Let's do another one. So it tells us  so this is a
little bit more interesting  it says dy dx is equal to
x over y, and it has the same conditions. It says y equals
1 at x equals 1. Or when x equals 1, y equals 1. So let's find the function
that satisfies this equation. This one's interesting because
we have an x and a y on the right hand side
of the equation. So this kind of looks like
something we got after we did some type of implicit
differentiation. But let's see where we go. So let's do the same thing. Let's multiply both sides of
this equation by dx until you get dy is equal to x over y dx. And let's get this y over
onto the dy side, because it will be easy to take
the antiderivative then. So we get y dy is
equal to x dx. Now we can take the integral of
both sides of this equation, or take the antiderivative on this
side with respect to y on the side with respect to x. I don't know why I
did it in brown. So what's the
antiderivative here? Well, it is y squared over 2. And I could say plus
c, some constant. Let me do that. There could be a constant here. I'll call it c1. We don't know what
that constant is. And that equals x squared
over 2 plus c2, right? Or some other constant. Maybe it's the same
number, I don't know. But we don't know what
either of these are. I could re-write it as 
let's see, what could I do? Let me take the x
out of that side. So I could have y squared over
2 minus x squared over 2 is equal to  and let me subtract
this from that side so I get the constants all on the right
hand side of the equation. c2 minus c1. I just took a c1, put it on the
right hand side, took the x squared over 2, put it on the
left hand side, that's why it's negative. And we didn't know. We said this could be
any constant and this could be any constant. So the difference between two
arbitrary constants could just be a third arbitrary constant. So I'll just
re-write that as c. So the general solution to this
differential equation is y squared over 2 minus x squared
over 2 is equal to c. Actually let's do something
else just to clean it up a little bit, because once again
this could be any constant. So let's multiply both sides
of this equation by 2 and you get y squared minus
x squared equal to 2c. Well now this is still any
constant number, so we could still write this as a c. So we have y squared minus
x squared is equal to c. Now let's use our initial
conditions to see what c is. So when y is 1, so 1 squared
minus when x is 1, 1 squared is equal to c, this is 1 minus 1,
so it's 0, right? c is equal to 0. So what is the particular
solution to this differential equation? I'll do it in green. It is y squared minus x
squared is equal to 0. Or we could add x squared
to both sides of that. We could also write it as y
squared is equal to x squared. Now you might be tempted to
take the square root of both sides of this and say
that y is equal to x. The reason why this would not
be accurate is because here x could be minus 2 and y could
be plus 2 or vice versa. So this would satisfy this
equation, but it would not satisfy this equation. So be careful when you
take that square root. You have to worry about
the plus or minus. Let's do one more. So this one says the derivative
of y with respect to x is equal to  OK, so this is even a
little bit more interesting. This is equal to the
square root of x over y. And it says that y is equal
to 4 when is equal to 1. Yup, I think I'm
reading that right. We could do this one
very similarly. So let's just do the same step. So multiply both sides of
the equation times dx. So you get dy is equal to 
and just to skip a step, I'm going to re-write square root
of x over y is the square root of x over the square root
of y, and I multiply both sides of that times dx. Now let's multiply both
sides of this equation by the square root of y. And I'm just going to re-write
it as y to the 1/2 power. That's the same thing as
the square root of y. dy is equal to x to
the 1/2 power dx. I just multiplied that
there and re-wrote it as y to the 1/2. So what is the antiderivative
of y to the 1/2 power? Well it's just this plus 1, so
it's y the 3/2 power, and then times the inverse of this. So times 2/3. Or you could have said
divided by this, either way. And if you're not sure about
this, because sometimes it is confusing with the fractions
and whatever else, take the derivative. 3/2 times 2/3 is 1, and then
you subtract this 1 from the exponent and you
get y to the 1/2. So that works. And of course, we kind of go
through the same drill, plus c1 is equal to  it's going to be
the same thing on this side  2/3 x to the 3/2 plus
c2, and what can we do? Well let's take the x to the
left hand side of this equation, so we get 2/3 y to
the 3/2 minus 2/3 x to the 3/2 is equal to c2 minus c1, which
we can just re-write as c. And let's multiply both sides
of this equation by 3/2, so these two will become 1. So you get y to 3/2 minus x to
the 3/2 is equal to  well what's 3/2 times
some constant c. But we didn't even know what
it was, we haven't solved for it, so we can still write c. I hope that doesn't
confuse you. 3/2 c, we didn't
know what it was. We could call this c3
and now this is c4. It's a different constant, but
we still have to solve for it. And now let's use our
initial conditions. So the initial conditions tell
us that 4  and they don't have to be initial conditions. You can kind of say conditions
or points where we know that the particular solution to this
differential equation are satisfied. So 4 to the 3/2 minus 1 to
the 3/2 is equal to c. What's 4 to the 3/2? So 4 to the 1/2 is 2, and then
that to the 3 power, that's 8. Then 1 to any power, but
especially in this case, 1 to the square root of 1 is 1. Then to the third power is 1. So 8 minus 1 is equal to c. And so c is equal to 7. So the particular solution of
this differential equation I will do in a different color,
and it is y to the 3/2 minus x to the 3/2 is equal to 7. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 1)
Well we already know that
definite integrals can help us figure out areas underneath
curves or between curves. What we'll show in this video
is that you can actually use pretty much the exact same
principles to figure out the volumes of rotational solids. So what do I mean? So let me just draw a
couple of examples. So let me start with a fairly
straightforward function. That's my y-axis. This is my x-axis. Let me draw my function. I'm going to draw y equals the
square root of x, but I'll keep it general right now, just so
this applies generally to a lot of things. So y equals the square root of
x looks something like that. It keeps going. Actually, let me redraw that,
because I didn't want it to curve down like
that at the end. It goes up like that,
and then it just keeps going up like that. That's better. OK. So we'll call that f of x. This is our x-axis. This is our y-axis. And we already know that if
we wanted to figure out the area under this curve
between two points. Let's say between the point
a well, we can do it between any two points. Let's say this point a and this
point b, and we wanted to find this area between
the two curves. I'm drawing everything
crooked today. Let me do a different color. If we wanted this area right
here, we would essentially just be just as a review be
summing up a bunch of small squares, where each square has
a bunch of rectangles, has a width dx, and its height at
that point would be whatever x value here is it
would be f of x. And if we take the sum of all
of these areas, of all of these rectangles, we would get
the area to this curve. And we learned in the definite
integral video that that's just equal to the definite integral
from a that's a lower bound from a to b of f of
x times d of x. Where each [? rafter ?] angle is f of x times d of x. And hopefully this makes a
little bit of intuitive sense to you. I think a lot of people go
through calculus just learning how to do it mechanistically,
just learning you know how to do it like a robot without
really understanding necessarily what's going on. And if you understand what's
going on, you'll never be really lost when you see
something a little bit different than what you
might have practiced. So with that out of the way,
let's think about something. What if we took this
function and we rotated it about the x-axis. So this might take a little bit
of visualization, but what you imagine is let me
see if I can draw. So I take this curve and if I
were to rotate it about the x-axis, it would look
something like this. It would look like a
sideways copper vase. It would look like that, where
that would be the opening. That would be the
opening on the inside. I can even shade it. Show you my drawing skills. OK. Hopefully that make sense. You know, that would be the
y-axis there, and the x-axis would pop out the middle. That's if you took this and
you rotated it around. So let me draw an arrow to show
that we're rotating it around. And if we did that, what would
be the volume created by well let's use the same
boundaries, between a and b. So if we took this piece and we
rotated it around, what would it look like between a and b. It would look
something like this. Let me see if I can draw it. So you would have a whoops,
I'm not trying that well. This is really testing the
limits of my ability to use this computer to draw things. It'd be kind of a circle on one
end, and then it would curve down a little bit and it would
be another circle on the other end. And if I were to draw the
x-axis, the x-axis would kind of pop out of the
middle right there. That right there would be
the point b, x equals b. If we were to kind of go behind
or look into the object we would see the other surface
of this rotational solid. And this point right
here, that would be a. That would be a. And then of course the x-axis
would keep going, and then that would be the y-axis. The visualization really
is the hardest part about these problems. So first just actually
imagine what you're doing. So I just did this section, if
I rotated it about the x-axis. But if I were to draw the whole
curve, the whole curve would look something like this. It would look something
like that, and we're just rotating it around. Hopefully that makes sense. We're rotating it
around that way. So how do we do that? Well we use the exact
same principle. When we figured out the area,
we would figure out the area of each of these small squares,
and then we would take the sum of an infinite number of
infinitely small squares, and we got this. So to do the volume, what we
do is instead of having each rectangle, we kind of rotate
each of these rectangles around the x-axis. If that's the rectangle,
it has width dx, and it has height f of x. So this height right here,
that's f of x at this point. If I were to rotate this
rectangle around the x-axis, what do I end up with? Well I'll end up with a disk. Let me see if I can draw
that reasonably well. I'm trying to show you some
perspective when I draw. So that would be the top
surface of the disk. And this would be the
side of the disk. And so this is the top
surface at the disk. And what would be the radius
of this disk, what would be this height right here? Well that radius, that's
going to be f of x. That's this height. Imagine if you took this and
rotated it around, that's the same thing as this height
right here, right? So that height or the radius
of the disk is f of x. And then what's the
width of the disk? Well that's just d of x. That's the same thing as this. We just rotated it around. So what would be the
volume of this disk? It would be the
area of this side. It'll be this area right
here times this height. Well what's the area? Well we know the radius, right? Area is equal to pi r squared. What's this radius? My radius is f of x, right? So the area of this disk is
equal to pi times the radius squared, it so it's pi times f
of x, the whole thing squared. So what would be the volume
of this entire disk? So it'll just be
this area times dx. I'm running out of
space and colors. So the volume of that disk is
going to be equal to area of that disk, pi f of x squared. The whole function, whatever
length this is at any point squared, that gives us the
area, times the depth you can say, so that's d of x. Now that gives us just the
volume of this one disk when it's rotated around. So if we wanted the volume of
this entire object that I drew here, we would just sum up
a bunch of these disks. We would take each of these
rectangles, rotate them around, figure out the volume of that
disk it creates, and then sum them up. And so essentially we're going
to take an infinite sum of a bunch of these small
little disks so we can take the integral. So this is the volume
of each disk. We could call that a
volume of a disk. So what's the volume
of the whole thing? Well we just take a sum,
an integral sum of each of these disks. So the volume when you rotate
it is going to be equal to the definite integral between and
remember, our boundaries were a and b between a and b of this
quantity right here pi f of x squared dx. So hopefully that
makes sense to you. Just remember, this is
the width of each disk. This is the radius of the disk,
or the radius of the surface, so it would be squared, and
that makes sense, that's the height, f of x. And we have pi r squared, so
that's where the pi comes from. Some people just memorize that. I don't recommend you do that,
and we'll see that later. But I'm out of time. In the next video I'll
actually apply this to an actual problem. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution  (part 2)
Welcome back. On the last video we came to
the conclusion that we could figure out the volume when we
rotate a function about the x-axis, so let's apply that
to an actual exercise. I'm going to erase everything
because I don't want you to memorize this, because frankly
I haven't memorized this. And if you do, you'll forget
it one day and then you won't know how to do it. But if you understand why it
works then you'll never forget. As long as you remember
basic integration. Maybe you want to memorize it
if your teacher tends to give you a test that don't have
much extra time in them, just to speed up the process. But you should know
what's going on. So let me draw the axes again. That's my y-axis. That's my x-axis. And so since our first example
was y equals square root of x, let's stick with that. And for reasons that might
become apparent that tends to be one of the more typical
examples when you rotate things around axes. So let me see if I can draw it
as well as I drew it last time. Almost. OK, so that's y equals square
root of x, it's just f of x this time, I've defined it. This is the x-axis. That's the y-axis. And I'm going to rotate this
around the x-axis again. So I'm going to get a
sideways looking cup thing. And let's say I want to figure
out the volume of that cup between the points 0 and to
make it simple, let's just say the points 0 and 1. So essentially we're just going
to get a cup, a sideways cup, it's going to look
something like this. It's going to look
something like this. That's going to be the
that's a horrible the opening of the cup. Actually why don't I
use the circle tool. It just dawned on me that
I had a circle tool. So the opening of the cup
will look like that. Actually I could
draw it right here. This would be the
opening of the cup. Well you can see sometimes
that my videos are a little unplanned. There you go. So that would be the
opening of the cup. This is excellent. This tool is very well suited
for what I'm doing here. We're rotating around that way. We're turning that function. So the cup's going to look like
that, so the bottom part of the cup's going to look like this. And it's solid, so we want the
volume of the whole thing. In future videos I'm going to
show you actually how to figure out the surface area of the
cup, which I find in some ways more interesting. So how do we think
about that again? Let's just rederive it,
but this time we'll use a specific equation. So we just have to figure out
what is the volume of one disk and then sum up all the disks. So let's say this disk right
here actually let's just take this disk at the end point
right here that I've already drawn something for. So what's the radius
of this disk? The radius of that disk
is f of x at that point. Well f of x at that point
is just square root of x. Radius is equal to
square root of x. And so the area of that disk is
going to equal pi r squared. Well the radius is square root
of x, so it equals pi times square root of x squared. So it equals pi times x. That's the area of each disk. And then if we want the volume,
you just have to multiply the area of that surface times
the depth of the disk. I'm just trying to show. You can imagine that this is
kind of like a quarter and this is the side of the quarter. We saw in the last video that
depth, that's just a very small change in x, because
we want each disk to be infinitesimally thin. So the width is just
dx at any point. So the volume of each disk is
equal to the area, which we just figured out was pi x
times the depth, times dx. That's the volume of each disk. So the total volume is
going to be equal to the sum of all of these. That was one disk I drew, then
you're going to have another one here, you're going to have
another one here, another one here. You're going to have infinitely
many, and you want them to be super, super, super thin so
that you get an accurate measure of the exact
volume of this curve. Otherwise it would just be an
approximation, and that's where we use the integral. So it will be the
integral from. And my original
boundaries were 0 to 1. The disk we used as an example,
this is probably you know the last disk, so this one will
actually have a radius of the square root of 1, which is 1. Not that you have to know that,
I'm just trying to keep emphasizing the visualization. So what will be the integral? Well we're going to go from 0
to 1, and we're going to sum up a bunch of these disks, which
we've already defined, so it's pi x dx. This is looking to be a fairly
straightforward integral. So what's the integral of that? Pi is just a constant and the
antiderivative of x is x to the 1/2 over I'm sorry. It's x squared over 2. I've been a little rusty
since I last did some antiderivatives. So we get x squared, we get
pi times x squared over 2. That's the
antiderivative of that. And then we have to evaluate
it at 1 and then subtract it and evaluate it at 0. And so what do we have. We get 1/2 pi, so we get pi
over 2 minus 0 pi, minus 0. So it equals pi over 2. There we go. We just figured out the volume
of this cup from 0 to 1. Reasonably interesting. Let's see if we can do that
again to figure out the just to give you another example,
just hit the point home to see if we can figure out the
volume of a sphere, the equation for the
volume of a sphere. So what's the equation
for a circle? It's x squared plus y squared
is equal to r squared. And let's write that in terms
of y is a function of x, just so we have something that
we can work with the way we learned it. So we get y squared is equal to
r squared minus x squared, and then we get y is equal to the
square root of r squared minus x squared. Actually now that I realize it,
I'm going to not do this, because I think I'm going into
too complicated a problem. I did that on a fly. But in the next video I will
do slightly more complicated without going to this one,
because I probably don't have time for it I just realized. Anyway I'll see you
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 3)
Welcome back. I don't know what
I was thinking. Sometimes my brain
malfunctions. But just going back to that
problem we were doing, actually I think we should do it. I'm a little
schizophrenic today. So let's figure out
the equation for the volume of a sphere. So what's the equation? It's x squared plus y squared
is equal to r squared. And let's just write y as
a function of x, just so we can do it the way we
did that last problem. So you get y squared is equal
to r squared minus x squared. y is equal to the square root
of r squared minus x squared. And let's draw it. So if this is my y-axis, this
is my x-axis, and the equation draw it straight
that's my x-axis, and then I actually have a circle tool,
let me see if I can use it effectively well,
close enough. There you go. I think you get the point. But anyway. This is just going to be the
upper half of the circle. Actually, I should probably
just undo that circle tool and try to draw it by hand. So y equals the square root of
r squared minus x squared. That's just going to be the
upper half of the circle. So it will be the positive x
quadrant and then actually, I should have drawn
the whole hemisphere. But anyway. Actually, let me do that,
because I think it'll make edit, undo, let me
clear all of this out. Sorry for wasting your time,
but I think it'll be effective. OK. So let me redraw. So this, that's the y-axis,
that's my x-axis, and then this the square root is,
since it's a function, it can only have one value, so we
assume it's defined as the positive square root. So if we were to graph that,
it would look like this. Something like that, where this
would be minus r and that's r. So if we want to find the
volume of a sphere with radius r, we just have to rotate this
function around the x-axis. This is the x-axis,
that's the y-axis. So let's see what we can do. Let's just visualize
the disks again. So let me make a disk. So let's say that that's the
side of one of the disks again, and as we know, the depth of
the disk is just going to be dx. That's how wide
that disk is, dx. And its radius at any point is
f of x, and in this case, it's y is equal to square root of
r squared minus x squared. So what's the surface
area of each disk? What's this? The surface area of
each of the disks. I hope you know
what I'm saying. So area is equal to pi r
squared, the radius at any point is equal to this, radius
is equal to y which is equal to square root and remember,
this is not this r. This is the radius
of this disk. I know it might be a
little confusing. y is equal to the square root
of r squared minus x squared. So the area is going to equal
pi times this squared. So if you square this quantity,
you just get rid of the square root sign, right? So pi r squared minus x
squared, and that's the area, and so what's the
volume of that disk? Well just like we've done in
every video up to this point, the volume of that disk is just
that, so the volume of that disk is just this pi r squared
minus x squared times dx. And so if we want to figure out
the volume of all these disks, I have a disk here, a disk
here, going around and around and around and around and
around and they get smaller and smaller until we have a sphere. We just take the integral, the
upper bound is positive r, the lower bound is minus r, and we
take the integral of this expression. pi let me distribute it,
because that's going to make it easier pi r squared, which is
just a constant term, minus pi x squared, all of that dx. So what's the antiderivative
of that expression? The antiderivative
within the parentheses. Well, this is just
a constant term. pi r squared, that's just a
number, because we're just taking the integral
with respect to x. So the antiderivative of pi r
squared is just pi r squared x, the derivative of pi r squared
x is just pi r squared, minus and we did this in
the last video. Actually, well now, it's the
antiderivative x squared, which is x to the third over 3, and
the pi is just a constant, so pi x to the third over 3, and
we're going to evaluate that at r and minus r. Let me erase some stuff, looks
like I'm running out of space. Hopefully all of that
you know by now. OK, back to the pen tool. OK. So let's evaluate it at r. So this is pi r squared, and
then for x, we'll substitute the positive r times r minus pi
x cubed, but now we have this r here, so r cubed over 3 minus
pi r squared, and then we have a minus r here, because we're
evaluating the antiderivative at minus r, times minus r,
minus pi minus r cubed. So what's minus r cubed? It's r cubed, but we'll
keep the minus sign. r cubed, and at that minus
sign, let's just make that that'll turn that
into a plus over 3. Let's see if we can clean
this up a little bit. So that first term is pi r
cubed, r squared times r, minus essentially 1/3pi r cubed. And then, what is this? This is pi r cubed, but then
we have a minus sign up. This is minus pi r cubed, and
then we have a minus sign up here, so this becomes plus pi r
cubed, and then minus because we have a plus here and a minus
out here, so distribute it so minus 1/3pi r cubed. And let's see, what do we have? We have essentially 1. If we just distribute out the
pi r cubes, we have pi r cubed times 1 minus 1/3
plus 1 minus 1/3. Well that's 2 minus 2/3, or
another way, let's see, is 2 minus 2/3 this is turning
into a fractions problem and what's well, that's 6/3
minus 2/3, it equals 4/3. So this is equal to 4/3. So the volume of the sphere is
equal to 4/3 pi r cubed, which is the equation for the
volume of a sphere. And actually, now that
I realize, it did take me eight and a half
minutes, so I am glad. My first intuition is always
correct, I am glad I did this in a separate video. But that should be pretty
interesting to you. And it makes a lot of sense. It's going to be a cube of
the radius, pi is involved. The 4/3 is interesting, just
in terms of how it relates to everything else. Area is pi r squared, and then
all of a sudden you get a 4/3 here, so it is something
for you to think about. Anyway, hopefully
you found that fun. I'll see you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 4)
Let's continue on with our study of
rotation of functions around the x, and we'll soon
see the y-axis as well. So let's do a slightly harder
example than what we've been doing, but I think it might be
obvious how to approach it. So there's my y-axis, there's
my x-axis, and in a couple of I think it was two problems
ago we figured out if we had the function y is equal to
square root of x let me try to draw it so this is y
equals square root of x if we were rotate that around the
x-axis, what the volume would be between two points, let's
say 0 and some other point. Now let's just pick an
arbitrary point 1. I think you know how to
do that at this point. Now let's make it a slightly
more difficult problem. Let's say I were to also
draw the function y is equal to x squared. So that looks if this is 1,
they both meet at 1, right? Because square root of 1 is 1,
and 1 squared is 1, so that would look something like this. They should be actually
symetric around y equals x, but anyway. So say y equals x squared
looks like that. So my question now is, what
is the volume if I were to take this figure and
rotate it around? So what do I mean? So this area here, if I were to
rotate that about the x-axis, what would the volume be? So now, what we did just with
the square root of x, we had like a solid cup, right? It would look
something like this. It would be like a cup, and it
was solid, we were just trying to figure out the volume of it. Hopefully that made
sense to you. Now it's going to be kind of a
hollowed-out cup, because we have this inside function, and
so the inside of the cup is going to be empty. Hopefully that makes
a little sense. Remember you're just taking
this and then you're rotating it around the x-axis. Well, the way to think about
it especially if you having trouble visualizing
actually, the solution might help you visualize it. The volume of this figure,
which I'm having trouble drawing, it will be the
volume formed by the outside rotation of this y
equals square root of x. We'll do that in the yellow. It'll be the volume formed when
that is rotated around, and then the whole solid volume
minus the volume when minus this volume. So if we took the y equals x
squared, y equals x squared would look something like that,
and then if you rotated it around the axis, it would
look something like that. I don't know if you've ever
been to Morocco, but they have these tajin plates that the
tops look a lot like that. Well, you probably haven't. Well, anyway. It would look
something like that. So if we subtract out this
volume when it's rotated around from the volume of y equals
square root of x, when that's rotated, we'll get this figure
that we're trying to figure out, this area when
it's rotated around. And that should be intuitive
for you, hopefully, because when we just did area under a
curve, that's how we would figure out the area
of this green area. We would figure out the area
under square root of x, and we'd subtract out the area
under y equals x squared. This time, we're going to say
the volume of the revolution of y equals square root of x minus
the volume of the revolution of y equals x squared. So let's do the problem. So the total volume let me do
a good color, that looks good total volume is going to be
equal to the volume formed when we rotate y equals square
root of x around the x-axis. I said from 0 to 1, and
that's because I picked where they meet. Sometimes in a book, or on an
exam, they'll just say, oh, you know, the area between y equals
x squared and y equals square of x, we're going to rotate
that around and you have to figure out, well they
intersected at 1, and you can just set the equations equal to
each other to figure that out. We're going from 0 to
1, because they also intersect at 0. 0 squared is the same thing
as square root of 0. We're going from 0 to
1, and so what's the volume of the larger? Or I guess the y equals square
root of x rotated around? I always forget the formula,
that's why I always redraw a disk, so if that's the radius
of my disk, the disk is going to come around like that, so
we know that the radius is a function of the disk, and
that's, of course, the dx is the depth of the disk. So the radius is the function
which, for the outside one, is square root of x, and we know
area of this disk is pi r squared, so we square the
radius, take a pi outside, and then we multiply that times the
width, so that's where we get our dx, and of course we
sum them all up and that's where we get the integral. I'm going to do it as
two separate integrals. Some people will put them both
within the same integral, but I really want to hit the point
home that this is the volume of the outside surface, formed by
the outside surface or the cup, minus the volume formed by
the the inside function. It's going to be minus pi
still going to be from 0 to 1 I drew fairly huge integral
signs, I don't know why and what's the inside function? It's x squared, and that's
going to be the radius of its own disks, if that's the
radius that's the disk, dx is the width, so it'll be x
squared, squared, times dx. So let's see if we
can figure that out. So, volume equals
let's take the pis out. I think you'll see that that
pi is applying to everything, so we can take the pi out. And then, times the integral,
and now we can merge them back, because integrals
are additive like that. You'll see what I'm
talking about. This integral is
the same thing. So what's square
root of x squared? Well that's just x. And what's x squared, squared? That's x to the fourth, right? You multiply the exponents,
exponent rules. We have a minus sign here. Minus x to the fourth, all that
times dx, we've got that pi on the outside, that equals
let's keep our pi on the outside. We're going to have to evaluate
the antiderivative at 1 and 0. So what's the
antiderivative of x? Well, that's x squared over
2, minus what's the antiderivative of
x to the fourth? Well, it's x to
the fifth over 5. That's hopefully
second nature to you. x to the fifth over 5, and
we're going to evaluate that at 1 and 0. 1 and 0. We're going to subtract them. Fundamental theorem
of calculus. So that equals I'm going to
switch colors to avoid monotony that equals pi
times, let's evaluate it at 1, so it's 1/2 minus 1/5 and when
you evaluate it at 0, it's 0 minus 0, so when you evaluate
0, you get nothing. And so what's 1/2 minus 1/5? That's pi times 2, get a common
denominator of 10, 5/2 is 1/2 minus 2/10 is 1/5, so this
equals, this would be 3, so we get 3pi over 10. That's the volume formed. So it's almost easier to
figure out the volume of this figure than to draw it. Anyway, I think I'll leave you
there with this video, and in the next video, we're
going to start rotating around the y-axis. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 5)
We've been doing a lot of
rotating around the x-axis, so let's start rotating around the
y-axis and see what we can do. Or at least attempt to. Let's me draw my axes. That's y-axis. That's my x-axis. Well let's just do it with an
example, but we'll call it f of x too because it'll
be generalizable. Let's just draw y
equals x squared. Let me just draw the positive
because we're going to rotate it around the y-axis and it's
symmetric anyway, so that's y equals x squared. This is y-axis. This is x-axis. Actually, no I'm going to keep
it general, then we'll actually solve it particularly. So we'll call this f of
x, but clearly this is y equals x squared. This is f of x. And we know how to take the
volume if I were to rotate this around the x-axis. But what if I wanted to say I
guess we could call it the area between 0 and I'm trying to
determine how general to be. Well let's just say
between 0 and 1. I think the boundaries
might make sense to you. Roughly this area, and
I'm going to rotate it around the y-axis now. So what's that final figure
going to look like? The base of it let me see
how well I can draw it. Nope that's not what
I wanted to do. The base is going to
look something like a cylinder like that. And then the top of it is also
going to be no, that's not what I wanted to do. Let me draw the side lines. So it's going to look
something like that. And then the top of it
looks something like that. But it's not just going
to be cylinder, right? If I was doing this entire
block it would be a cylinder. But the inside of it is going
to be kind of hollowed out. Let me see how effective
I am at drawing that. I'll do it in a
different color. So the inside is going
to be hollowed out. I don't know if that
makes sense to you that. It's kind of like on the inside
it'll look like a bowl. On the outside it'll look
like a cylinder or a can. Hopefully that makes sense. You take this and you
rotate this around. And the curve that specifies
the inside would be y is equal to x squared. It would rotate all
the way around. I think that makes sense. The drawing is the
hardest part. So how do we do it? Well even the shape
might give you an idea. We can't use that disk method,
what we were doing before when we were rotating the x-axis,
that was the disk method, because we were essentially
imagining each of these particular disks and
then summing them up. Now we're going to do something
called the shell method. So what's the shell method? Instead of taking a bunch of
disks and figuring out their combined volumes, we're going
to take a bunch of shells. So what's a shell? So imagine a rectangle
right here. Hope you can see
it right there. Let's say it's at
the point x,1. What's its height going to be? Its height going
to be f of x,1. That's its height. Now imagine taking that
sliver and rotating it around the y-axis. What's it going to look like? Well, it's going to look like a
shell, it's going to look like a cylinder, just like the
outside of a cylinder. It's going to look not too
different then that but I want to draw it well because
intuition is the most important thing that, not getting
the problem right. Let me see if I can
draw this respectably. And then we're going to have
the bottom of the shell, it'll look something like that. Let me finish these lines up. I think you get the point. OK. So it's going to look
like a shell like that. The outside of the shell
is going to be solid. And it'll have some width,
but the inside is hollow. Let me do a different color. Maybe a darker color to show
that that's the inside. You know it's like a
ring essentially. And so what's the
height of this ring? The height is going
to be f of x,1. So let me do a brighter color
so you know what I'm saying. The height of this
ring is f of x,1. f of x evaluated at that
arbitrary point we picked up. What is going to be the
surface area of this ring? You know, this outside. Well let's think about it. It'll be the circumference of
this ring times it's height. So what's the circumference
of this ring? Let's go back to our
basic geometry. Circumference is equal to
2 pi times the radius. So if we know the radius of it,
we know the circumference. Well what's the radius? Well the radius is how far
we went from the axis of rotation to that point. So that's the radius. So in our particular
example the radius is x,1. It's that x point that
we're evaluating it at. So circumference is going to be
equal to 2 pi times that point that we're evaluating at. And so the surface area this
magenta thing that I filled in that's going to be equal
to the circumference times this height, which we already
said is f of x,1. Let's call it area surface. Surface area is equal to
circumference times height, which is equal to 2 pi
x,1 times f of x,1. We figured out the
surface are of this. Now how do we figure
out the volume? Well what's the width of it? How thick is this ring? What's this thickness
right here? It's a very small thickness. But we took this sliver, and
this sliver as we learned in previous calculus, the width of
this little rectangle is dx. And you know when we take the
integral, it's going to get infinitely smaller and smaller
and we'll have infinitely more and more of them. So the width of this is dx. Let me draw it big, not
so horrible looking. So if this is a sliver,
it's width is dx. It's height is f of x,1. x,1 will be right
in the center. And then it's distance from
the center is of course x,1. Hopefully that make sense. So what's the volume
of this shell? So the volume of the shell
this shell, not this one the volume of the shell is going to
be equal to the surface area of the shell times how
wide that surface is. And that width is dx, so it's
going to equal this times dx. So the volume of that
shell is 2 pi x,1 times f of x,1 times dx. I think you see where I'm
going with this now. So what would be the volume
of the entire rotated figure, this thing here? Well I'm just going to sum
up each of these shells. I have one shell there, then
here I'll have a slightly less high shell, and up here I would
have a much bigger shell, and I'll add them up. Here's one shell
that goes around. Then they'll be another shell
here, and I'll add them all up. And that's taking the integral. So the total volume of the
figure when I rotate it around the y-axis is going to be and
my boundary is from 0 to 1 2 pi this one I just told you a
particular x,1 but we're going to sum them over
all of the x's. So it's going to be
2 pi x f of x dx. This is just a constant,
so you could call it 2 pi times x f of x. So let's take a
particular example. Let's do it for x squared. Let's say the function
is x squared. So in this case the volume is
going to equal let's take the 2 pi out 2 pi integral 0 to 1
x times f of x f of x in our case is x squared, which I drew
earlier dx equals 2 pi. This is just x to
the third, right? x to the third. So it's going to be 2 pi
times the antiderivative of x to the third. Well that's x to
the fourth over 4. Evaluate it at 1 minus
evaluate it at 0. Well that equals 2 pi times
1 to the fourth is 1, so 1/4 and then minus 0. So it's 2 pi times 1/4. So that's pi over 2. That's the volume, and we just
rotated it around the y-axis. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 6)
In the last video we took
essentially the length of y equals x square, not the
length, but we went from zero to 1 on the x-axis and you
can view it as this area. And we rotated around the
y-axis to get this figure here and we figured out the volume,
I think our answer if I remember was pi over 2. And we use what I called
and what everyone calls the Shell method. I want to show you that
you could actually used the disk method here. But then we'll just have
to switch the ys and xs. Instead of writing this the
function as a function of x, we'll just take the
inverse of it and write it as a function of y. so this curve y equals x
squared, what it can also be written as, we can just take
the squared root of both sides as x is equal to
the square root of y. Just take the square
root of both sides. And now we can use this
information to do the disk method, but everywhere where
we had an x in the past we'll now have a y. So let's think about
how we would do it. Once again it's this area
really the hardest thing about all of these problems is
just the visualization. I think that's why they do it. Just to make sure that you know
how to visualize things and maybe understand the calculus. It's more visualization
then calculus really. So we're still dealing with
if we take a cross section, if we were to cut this figure this
area would be the cross section. And we're still rotating around
the y-axis just like we did in the last video. We're still rotation around the
y-axis, we get this figure. So how would we
deal with disks. Well a disk would look like
this at some point let me pick another color. At some point we'd have
a disk like that. That would be the top of the
disk, and it would have some depth like we did before. And its height, or the
radius of that disk, would be equal to x. It's equal to x. I know you're thinking it
looks like the shell method. But what is x equal to? It's equal to the
square root of y. It equals the square root of y. And what would be the
width of that disk? Now we are making everything as
a function of y, so the width would be just a very small
distance d y, the differential y. That's essentially
all we need to know. So the volume of that disk
would be the radius squared times pi times d y. Hopefully that makes a little
bit sense, but there's another hitch on this problem. This is actually similar to
what we did two videos ago. Because when you view it in the
y-axis, from this y frame of reference, what we're going to
do is we're going to take the volume, we take the volume
of x is equal to 1. So what would be the volume
of x is equal to 1 rotated around the x-axis? It would just be the
entire cylinder. It's really important
that you visualize this right, what we're doing. We're going to figure
out this volume, volume of x is equal to 1. Let me draw the axis just so
you know what we're doing. So this would be the y-axis,
that would be the x-axis as best as I can draw. Originally, we can figure
out the volume of the entire cylinder. This is x is equal to 1, x is
equal to 1 from what y points? From the point,
well what is this? This is y equals 1. y equal 1 to zero. So we would figure out this
volume from y equals 1 to zero. And how would we do that? What would be the integral? Remember everything is in
y now, so it might seem a little confusing. For each of these disks, this
is going to be made up of a bunch of disks, let
me draw one of them. Let me draw the top one. The top disk, and it has a
width, it's not going to be this entire cylinder, its
width is d y, its width is just going to be this. d y, a very small sliver. d y, and its radius is x
or you could say f of y. What would be the
volume of that disk? What would be the surface
area of the top? It would be f of y squared. Remember we're dealing
everything with y. f of y squared times pi, that
gives the area of the top. Put the pi outside of
the integral times d y. d y, and we said y is
going from zero to 1. y is going from zero to 1. So that's that entire cylinder. And what we'll want to do is
subtract out, essentially cut out the volume of
the inner bowl. So minus. How would we figure
out the inner bowl? That's where we will deal
with the x is equal to the square root of y function. Because here, what's each disk? Once again it's f of y. I wrote this generally, this
is f of y of the outside. I'm going to now do
it for the inside. I'm going to cut out the inside
volume and because I kept it general I could do it. We're still going from
zero to 1, from y equals zero to y equals 1. Remember we're
doing with y now. I will take f of the inside
f of y squared d of y. You can imagine in this case
the inside function, we're going to take the volume. That original disk I drew is
actually one of the disks for the inside function. Where the height of that disk
is d y, that should be d y. The radius of the
disk is f of y. And of course the area of
the top of the desk is pi times the radius squared. How do we apply it to this
particular situation? What is the outside function? f of y, x is equal to f of y. We are just switching
the variables. We say that x is equal to 1. This is just a big
cylinder, right? So f of i is equal go to 1 in
this function, so we get pi let me switch colors
times from zero to 1. 1 squared d y minus pi,
and we're still going from zero to 1. Remember, that's
the y boundaries. What's f of y? Here f of y is square
root of y squared d y. Let's take the pi out. So pi times, well
1 squared is 1. What's the
anti-derivative of 1? What function's
derivative is 1? It's x, right? x, that's the
anti-derivative there. We can merge these. We took the pi out. This square root of y
squared, this is just y. Sorry, we have that
derivative 1. See, even I get quite
confused here. We're taking this with
respect to y, right? The anti-derivative
of 1 now is y. We are setting up
a bunch of ys. I'm sorry. I find this even a little
perplexing when I start switching x and y. The second function. Remember, we can merge these
because it's the same boundaries and they're
both in respect to y. Square root of y squared is y. What's the anti-derivative of
y, the function y or y d y. Was y squared over 2,
minus y squared over 2. We are going to evaluate
that at 1 and zero. So what does that get us? We get pi we get 1 minus
1/2 minus zero minus zero minus zero plus 0/2. Whatever these are zero. 1 minus 1/2 that's
1/2 and times pi is equal to pie over 2. Which is the exact same result. And I was worried, because you
never know when you might make a careless mistake
as I often do. We got the exact same result as
I got in the previous video when we used the shell method. The hardest thing here is just
remembering that you're doing everything in terms of y. When we did the disk method
traditionally, the disks were vertical disks. Now they're horizontal disks
but it's the exact same thing. You just have to get your brain
around the idea that we're dealing with the ys, that the
boundaries on the integrals are now y values. We're taking the width of the
disks, or the height of the disks are d y and the radius
is now the function of y. Hopefully I didn't
confuse you too much. My own brain malfunctioned
a bit when I took the anti-derivative of 1 d y,
it should have been y. I will see you in the next
video where we will do even more complicated problems,
where I'm sure I'll make even more mistakes. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 7)
Let's do a couple more
rotational volume problems, and I'm going to make these a
little bit more difficult. And hopefully after these if
you've understood everything we've done up to now and the
ones I'm about to do, I think you're pretty set for most
of what you should face in most math classes. And definitely I think you'll
be set for the AP exam, and either ab or bc
on this concept. So let's do another example. OK. So let's say that I want
to actually, let me do something different. Let me draw here. So that's my y-axis. This is my x-axis. Now let me draw the function
y is equal to x squared. And we know that that could be
written as y is equal to x squared, or we could write that
as x is equal to square root of y, depending on what we want
to be a function of what. This is the y-axis. This is the x-axis. Let's say I also have
the line y equals 2. Goes over what I just wrote. y equals 2. Now this problem is going to
be slightly different then what we've done so far. I'm going to take a rotation,
but instead of taking a rotation around the y or the
x-axis, I'm going to take a rotation around another line. So let's say I want to
take a rotation between x is equal to 0. Actually let me do
something arbitrary. Let me say between x is equal
to 1, so that's that point, and x is equal to 2. That's where they intersect. This is the point right
here, this is 2,2. I'm sorry, no, 2,4. Because y is equal
to x squared. So this is 2,4. This is the point 4. So what point is this. This is the point 1, right? So our y values go from 4 to 1,
our x values go from 1 to 2. And that makes sense,
because y is x squared. And so if we were to kind of
take the area that we're going to rotate, and I haven't told
you what we're going to rotate it around yet, and this might
prove to be shocking to you. So this is the area
we're going to rotate. Instead of rotating it around
the y-axis, I want to rotate it around the line y
is equal to minus 2. So if that's 2, y equals minus
2 should be roughly here. So I'm going to rotate this
area around this line. So what's it going
to look like? It's going to be a
fairly big ring. Like if I were to try to draw
it let me see if I can even make an attempt. Once again this is always the
hardest part, just drawing what I'm trying to rotate. I'll try to do it from
an upward perspective. So that's kind of the inner
loop, and then there will be an outer loop. The top is flat right, because
it's defined by y is equal to 4, so that's the top. And the inside is also
going to be a hard edge. But then the outside is
going to curve inward. I don't know if you see what
I'm saying, because this is the outside, it's curving inward. So it's going to be a big ring. So if I were to draw the axis,
this would be the y-axis access coming in no, no, sorry. Whoops. The y-axis is actually going to
be closer to this hand side. The y-axis is going to be in
the middle of kind of so this is going to be the
y-axis coming up here. And then the x-axis is
going to come below that. I'm drawing everything at
an angle as best as I can. The x-axis is going to
come a below that. And then this line we're
rotating it around, that's going to be
someplace over here. That's going to be
something like that. It's going to go behind there
and come back over there. Hopefully that makes sense. We're just getting a big ring. So how are we going to do this? Well actually there's a
couple of things we can do. First we could just
use the shell method, using the x value. So how do we do that? The important thing is
to always visualize the shell or the disk. So the shell method we're going
to take slivers like this, where the width of
that sliver is dx. I could draw it really big. So that's our direct
angle, is going to be dx. What's the height going
to be of the sliver? Well it's going to be
the top function minus the bottom function. It's going to be y equals
4 minus x squared. So this is going to be 4 minus
x squared, the height at any point right here. And then if I were to do
the shell just like we did before let me see if I
can draw a decent shell. I think I'm getting
better at this. This is one edge of the shell,
that's the other shell. We already figured out that
the width of the shell is dx. The height is 4 minus x
squared, the top function minus the bottom function because of
the distance between the two. And then what's the
radius going to be? What's the radius of
that shell going to be? Well, is it going to be just x? Is it just going to be x value? No, the x value will tell you
the distance from the y-axis to that shell, and it's going to
be from minus 2 to the e value. So it's going to be
essentially 2 plus x. That's going to be the
radius at any point. And this is where we diverge
from what we've done before. Before the radius was just
x, but now it's 2 plus x. So what's the circumference
of each shell going to be? Well circumference is
equal to 2 pi r, and our radius is 2 plus x. So it's 2 pi times 2 plus
x, which equals 4 pi plus 4 pi plus 2 pi x. That's the circumference. And then what's the
surface area of this? Well it's going to be the
circumference times the height. So surface area is
equal to that. The circumference 4 pi plus 2
pi x, all of that times the height times 4
minus x squared. And let's see if we
can foil this out or distribute this out. So 4 pi times 4 is 16 pi. 4 pi minus x squared
minus 4 pi x squared. 2 pi x times 4 plus 8 pi x, and
then 2 pi x times minus x squared, so that's minus
2 pi x to the third. So that's the surface
area of each ring. And then if we want the volume
of each shell, essentially we multiply it times
the width, the dx. So that's the volume of
each shell, and if we want the volume of all the
shells, we sum them up. So we take the integral, that's
an integral sign, and I'm running out of space
like I always do. And where did I take
the integral from? I take the integral from x is
equal to 1 to x is equal to 2. From 1 to 2. That's probably too
small for you to read. So let's see if we can take
the antiderivative of this. Let me make some space
free just so I don't have to write so small. So I'll keep this down here,
because that's the set up of the problem. I think I can get rid
of a lot of this. I think that is pretty good. OK. And let me switch
to another color. And we're going to take
the antiderivative. So what's the
antiderivative of this? So the antiderivative
of 16 pi is 16 pi x. And then what's the
antiderivative of 4 pi x squared? It's going to be x to the third
over 3, so it'll be minus 4 pi over 3 sorry 4 pi
over 3 x to the third. Well this will be x squared
over 2, so it'll be plus 4 pi x squared. And then minus, this will
be x to the fourth over 4, so minus pi over 2. Just divided by 4. x to the fourth. I'm going to evaluate that. This is a much hairrier problem
then what we've been doing. 2 and at 1. So what is it evaluated at 2? It is 32 pi minus 4 pi over 3
times 8 plus 4 pi times 4 plus 16 pi minus 2 to the fourth is
16 divided by 2 minus 8 pi. And then I just realized I'm
running out time, so I will continue this in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Solid of Revolution (part 8)
Where I left off, we were just
essentially chugging through this fairly hairy derivative
this definite integral this antiderivative. It takes my brain a
little while to come up with the next term. So we evaluated at 2 and
now we have to subtract this evaluated at 1. So minus 16 pi minus 4
pi over 3 oh, sorry. Plus. The minus is going to
be on everything. Oh no, sorry. That is a minus. That's a minus. Plus 4 pi. Right? Because x is 1. Minus pi over 2. And now we can simplify it. Let's see what we can do. This is really a hairy problem. The 16 pi minus 8 pi,
that equals 8 pi. And then that's a plus. The 32 plus 8 pi. 32 pi plus 8 pi,
that equals 40 pi. So let's see, I've simplified
it to 40 pi, and what's minus 8 times 4 is 32 pi over 3. And then all of that, let's
see if I can simplify this. Let's see, 16 pi plus
4 pi, that's 20 pi. And then, let's see. Minus 4 pi over 3
minus pi over 2. So let's get a common
denominator for this part right here. So if I put everything over 6
20 pi over 6 is the same thing is 120 pi over 6, and then
minus 4 pi over 3, if I put it over 6 it becomes
8 pi over 6, right? And then pi over 2, if I put it
over 6 it becomes 3 pi over 6. So minus 3 pi. So this whole term that we're
going to have to subtract from this term is equal to
120 minus 11, right? So that's 109 pi over 6. This equals 1 is that right? Yeah, 109 pi over 6. See what happens when you
make up problems on the fly? You get ugly numbers. 109 pi over 6. And what does that
top part translate? So this is what we're
going to subtract. This is when we evaluated
the antiderivative at 1. And let's simplify this one. So that one, if we put 3 common
denominator, that's 120 pi over 3 minus 32 pi over 3. 120 minus 32, let's
see, we get 90 88? Right. 88 pi over 3. So that equals 88 pi over
3, and remember, that's just the top part. And then this is more of a
review of fractions than anything else and then if
I want to put it over 6, I just double it. So I think we're almost done. Let me switch colors. So if you go over a
denominator of 6 88 pi over 3 let's see. If I double that, I
get 160 176, right? 176 pi minus this. Minus 109 pi. I'm sure I made a
careless mistake. These are my least favorite
type of things to do. Hairy fractions. So 176 minus 109. That's the same thing
as 76 minus 9. And that is 65. So our final answer
is 65 pi over 6. Which isn't as hairy
as it seemed when we started the problem. But that's pretty neat. This is kind of a
strange shape. It's kind of a wide ring that
has the upper part of the ring and the inner part of
the ring are hard edges. But then it's curved
on the outside. And we were able to figure
out the volume of that. Especially and what was weird
about this, is when it was rotated around the line
y is equal to minus 2. Hopefully I didn't confuse you. These are about as difficult
as these volume of revolution problems get. If you want more,
just let me know. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Sequences and Series (part 1)
Let's learn a little bit
about sequences and series. So what's a sequence? Well, a sequence is just a
bunch of numbers in some order. You know, the most difficult
sequence is 1, 2, 3, 4. You get the point. And what's a series? Well, it's often represented
it's just a sum of sequences, a sum of a sequence. So, for example, the arithmetic
sequence sorry the arithmetic series is just the sum of
the arithmetic sequence. So 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus
we could keep going until maybe some number. This is called the
arithmetic series. Nothing too fancy here. But before we move forward,
let's get a notation for how we can represent these sums
without necessarily having to write out all of the digits or
having to keep doing this dot, dot, dot, plus notation. And that notation
is Sigma notation. That's an upper case Sigma. And how do you use
Sigma notation? Well, let's say I wanted
to represent this arithmetic series. So I would say, well,
let's add up a bunch of let's call them k's. This is an arbitrary variable. And we'll start at k equals 1. We'll start at k equals
1, and we'll go to k is equal to big N. And this is the exact same
thing, so we first make k equal to 1, and then we add it to k
is equal to 2 plus 3, and we go all the way until N minus
1 and then plus N. So this is the Sigma notation
for the arithmetic series. Before I move on, I think this
is a good time just to like learn a little bit more about
the arithmetic series. We'll actually focus on this
one and the geometric series because those are the two
that you'll see most often. And then once you learn
calculus, I'll show you the power and Taylor series, which
is exact the Taylor series is a specific version
of a power series. But let's play around with this
arith I keep wanting to say arith-MET-ic, but a-RITH-metic,
either way series. So let's call the sum S. Let's say that this is equal to
the sum from k is equal to 1 to N of k, which is equal to, just
like we said, 1 plus 2 plus 3. And we'll just keep adding
them, dot, dot, dot, to a bunch of numbers, to big N minus
1 plus big N, right? Fair enough. Now, bear with me a second. I'm just going to write that
same exact sum again, but I'm just going to write
it in reverse order. And I think it's intuitive to
you that it doesn't matter what order I add up numbers in. They'll add up to
the same number. 2 plus 1 is the same thing
as 1 plus 2, right? So let me write this exact
same sum, but I'll write it in reverse order. So that's the same thing as N
plus N minus 1, plus N minus 2, plus and the pluses
keep going plus 2 plus 1. This is the exact sum, just
in the reverse order. And I did that for a reason
because now I'm going to add both sides of this equation. I'm going to take S plus S. Well, that's just 2S. And that's going to equal
this sum plus this sum. I wrote this so that
the sum becomes clean. And why do I say that? Well, let's add up
corresponding terms. We could have added up any
terms, but so since they all have to add up, let's just add
the 1 plus the N, then we'll add the 2 plus the N minus 1,
then we'll add the 3 plus the N minus 2, and so forth. And I think you'll see in a
second, or maybe you already realize why I'm doing this. One plus the N, the 2 plus the
N minus 1, the 3 and the N minus 2, all the way to the N
minus 1 and the 2, the N and the 1. What's 1 plus N? Well, that's just
N plus 1, right? What's 2 plus N minus 1? Well, that's also
N plus 1, right? What's 3 plus N minus 2? I think you could guess. It's N minus 1. And we just keep doing that. And what's N minus 2 plus 2? Sorry, this is a plus. N plus 1. And what's N plus 1? Well, that's just N
plus 1, of course. So my question to you
is how many of these N plus 1's are there? Well, there are N
of them, right? Each N plus 1 corresponds
to each of these terms, so there are N of these. So instead of just adding N
plus 1 N times, we could say that this is just
N times N plus 1. So we have 2 times the sum is
equal to N times N plus 1, and we could divide both sides by
2, and we get the sum is equal to N times N plus 1 over 2. Now, why is this neat, or
why is this cool at all? Well, first of all, we found
out a way to sum this Sigma notation up. We got kind of a
well-defined formula. And what makes this especially
cool is you can use this for low-end parlor tricks. What do I mean by that? Well, you can go up to someone
and you can say, well, how quickly do you think I can add
up the numbers between 1 and what am I doing oh,
between 1 and 100? And, you know, people will say,
oh, it will take you a little time: 1 plus 2 plus 3. And you say, well, it takes
me no time at all because this is what I can do. So the sum and I just want
to show you that you can use different variables from B
equals 1, we're taking the variable B, to 100, right? That's the sum from 1 to 100. And we figured out
what that formula is. It's going to be 100
times 101 over 2. Well, what's 100 times 101? It's just going to be 101
with two zeroes, right? 10,100 over 2, and
that equals 5,050. That's pretty neat. Instead of having to say 1 plus
2 plus 3 plus blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
plus 98 plus 99 plus 100, this would take you some time, and
there's a very good chance you would make a careless mistake. We could just plug into this
formula, which we proved and hopefully you understood,
and say that equals 5,050. You could do even something
more impressive: the sum from 1 to 1,000. What's the sum from 1 to 1,000? Well, our formula, remember,
was N times N plus 1 over 2. So if N is equal to 1,000,
then what's our sum? It's 1,000 times 1,001 over 2,
which is equal to well, we'll just add three zeroes to
this: 1,001, one, two, three. Sorry, I think that was
my first burp ever on one of these videos. I should re-record it, but
I'm going to move forward. That kind of disconcerted
me a little bit. I'd eaten too much. Anyway, divided by 2,
and what is that? Let's see, it'll be 500
let's see, this is a million. Half of a million is 500,000. 500,500. And that would have taken
you forever to do manually. But based on this formula we
just got, you know how to do it very, very quickly. So that's the
arithmetic series. But let's do another one. This is another typical
series that you might see. Actually, this one you'll see a
lot in your life, especially if you go into finance or really a
whole series of scientific this shows up a lot, and this
is called the geometric series. And the geometric series is
essentially you take x. And I'll do it generally where
I just take a variable x, and I say well, no, no. Let me just not take an x. Let me just take some number. So let's say some number a to
the k from I don't know. Let's say from k is equal
to 0 to k is equal to N. What does that mean? Well, that means a to the 0,
right, k is 0, plus a 1 plus a squared plus a to the third
plus and you could keep going plus a to the N minus
1 plus a to the N minus 2. This is called the
geometric series. And it might not be obvious to
you, but this type of growth, where you keep increasing the
exponent, this is called geometric growth. So how do you take
the sum of this? Well, let's see if we can do a
similar trick, although this trick will involve
one more step. So let's call the sum S. Let's call it the sum from k
equals 0 to N, a to the k. And that, of course, is
equal to what I just wrote. I probably didn't have
to do it like this. a squared plus bup, bup, bup,
bup, plus a to the N minus 1, plus a to the N minus 2. Now let's define another sum,
and I'm going to call that aS. Actually, I'm about to run out
of time, so I'll continue this in the next video. 

Transcript for: Sequences and series (part 2)
Welcome back. So where we left off in the
last video, I'd shown you this thing called the
geometric series. And, you know, we could
have some base a. It could be any number. It could be 1/2,
it could be 10. But that's just
but some number. And we keep taking it to
increasing exponents, and we sum them up, and this is
called a geometric series. And so I want to figure out the
sum of a geometric series of, you know, when I have some base
a, and I go up to some number a to the n. What is this a to
the why did I write a to n minus 2 there? That should be a to the big N. My brain must have been
malfunctioning in the previous video. That always happens when I
start running out of time. But anyway. Let's go back to this. So I defined s as
this geometric sum. Now I'm going to
define another sum. And that sum I'm going
to define as a times s. And that equals well, that's
just going to be a times this exact sum, right? And that's the same
a as this a, right? That a is the same as this a. So what's a times
this whole thing? Well, it's the a times a
to the zero is let me write it down for you. So this'll be a because I just
distribute the a, right? a times a to the zero, plus a
times a to the 1, plus a times a squared, plus all the way a
times a to the n minus one, plus a times a to the n. I just took an a and I
distributed it along this whole sum. But what is this equal to? Well, this is equal to
a times a to the zero. That's a one a to the first
power plus a squared, plus a cubed, plus a to the n, right? Because you just add the
exponents, a to the n. Plus a to the n plus 1. So this is as. And we saw before that s
is just our original sum. That is just a to the zero,
plus a to the 1, plus a squared, plus up, up, up, up. All the way to plus
a to the n, right? So let me ask you a question. What happens if I
subtract this from that? What happens? If I say, as minus s. Well, I subtracted this from
here, on the left hand side. What happens on the
right hand side? Well, all of these
become negative, right? Let me do it in a bold color. This becomes because I'm
subtracting negative, negative, these are
all negatives. Negative. Negative. Well, a to the first,
minus a to the first. That crosses out. a squared
minus a squared crosses out. a to the third,
it'll all cross out. All the way up to a
to the n, right? So what are we left with? We're just left with minus
a to the zero, right? We're just left with that term. And we're just left
with that term. Plus a to the n plus 1. And of course, what's
a to the zero? That's just 1. So we have a times s
minus s is equal to a to the n plus 1 minus 1. And now let's
distribute the s out. So we get s times a minus
1 is equal to a to the n plus 1 minus 1, right? And then what do we get? Well, we can just divide
both sides by a minus 1. Let me erase some of
this stuff on top. I think I can safely erase
all of this, really. Well, I don't want
to erase that much. I want to erase this stuff. That's good enough. OK. So I have just dividing both
sides of this equation by a minus 1, I get s is equal to a
to the n plus 1 minus 1 over a minus 1. So where did that get us? We defined the geometric
series as equal to the sum. From k is equal to 0,
to n of a to the k. And now we've just derived
a formula for what that sum ends up being. Equals a to the n plus 1
minus 1 over a minus 1. And why is this useful? We now know, if I were to say,
well, what is let me clean up all of this, as well. Let me clean up all of
this and we can OK. So if I said, you figure out
the sum of, I don't know, the powers of 3 up to 3 to the, I
don't know, 3 to the tenth power. So, you know, 3. So 3 to the zero, plus 3 to the
one, plus 3 squared, plus all the way to 3 to the tenth. So this is the same thing as
the sum of k equals zero to 10, of 3 to the k. Right? So this formula we just figured
out, a is 3 and n is 10. So this sum is just going to be
equal to 3 to the eleventh power minus 1 over 3 minus 1. Which equals well, I
don't know what 3 to the eleventh power is. Minus 1 over 2. So that's kind of useful. That is a number. Although you'd have to memorize
your exponent tables to the eleventh power to do that. But I think you get the idea. This is especially useful if we
were dealing with well, if the base was a power of ten,
it would be very, very easy. But what I actually want to do
now is I want to take this and say, well, what happens
if n goes to infinity? Let me show you. So what happens? So there's two types of series
that we can take that's not what I wanted to do. There are two types of series
that we can take that we can find the sums of. There's finite series,
and infinite series. And in order for an infinite
series to come up to a sum that's not infinity, they
need to what we say they need to converge. And if you think about what has
to happen for them to converge, every next digit has to
essentially get smaller and smaller and smaller, as
we go towards infinity. So let's say that
a is a fraction. a is 1/2. So how does a geometric series
look like if we have 1/2 there? So let's say that we're taking
the geometric series from k is equal to 0 to infinity. So this is neat. We're going to take an infinite
sum, an infinite number of terms, and let's see if we can
actually get an actual number. You know, we take an infinite
thing, add it up, and it actually adds up to
a finite thing. This has always amazed me. And the base now is
going to be 1/2. It's 1/2 and it's going to
be 1/2 to the k power. So this is going to be what? 1/2 to the zero, plus 1/2,
plus what's 1/2 squared? Plus 1/4, plus 1/8, plus 1/16. So as you see, each term is
getting a lot, lot smaller. It's getting half of
the previous term. Well, let's say, what happens
if this wasn't infinity? What happens if this was n? Well, then we'd get plus 1
over 2 to the n, right? 1/2 to the n is the same
thing as 1 over 2 to the n. And if we look at the formula
we figured out, we would say, well, that is just equal to
1/2 to the n plus 1, minus 1, over 1/2 minus one. And that would be our answer. We'd have to know what n is. But now we want to know what
happens if we go to infinity. So this is essentially
a limit problem. What happens what's the
limit, as n goes to infinity, of 1/2 to the n plus one
minus 1 over 1/2 minus 1? Well, all of these are constant
terms, so nothing happens. So what happens as this term,
right here, goes to infinity? What's 1/2 to the
infinity power? Well, that's zero. That's an unbelievably
small number. Take 1/2 to arbitrarily large
exponents, this just goes to 0. And so what are we left with? We're just left with this
equals minus 1 over 1/2 minus 1, or we could multiply the top
and the bottom by negative 1. And we get 1 over 1 minus 1/2. Which equals 1 over 1/2,
which is equal to 2. I find that amazing. If I add 0 plus 1/2 plus 1/4
plus 1/8 plus 1/16 and I never stop I go to infinity and
not infinity, but I go to 1 over essentially 2 to the
infinity I end up with this neat and clean number. 2. And this might be a little
project for you, to actually draw it out into like maybe a
pie and see what happens as you keep adding smaller and
smaller pieces to the pie. But it never ceases to amaze
me, that I added an infinite number of terms, right? This was infinity. And I got a finite number. I got a finite number. Anyway, we ran out of time. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Taylor & Maclaurin polynomials intro (part 1) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
I've draw an arbitrary
function here. And what we're
going to try to do is approximate this
arbitrary function we don't know what it
is using a polynomial. We'll keep adding terms
to that polynomial. But to do this,
we're going to assume that we can evaluate
the function at 0, that it gives us some
value, and that we can keep taking the
derivative of the function and evaluating the
first, the second, and the third derivative, so
on and so forth, at 0 as well. So we're assuming that
we know what f of 0 is. We're assuming that we
know what f prime of 0 is. We're assuming that we know
the second derivative at 0. We're assuming that we know
the third derivative at 0. So maybe I'll write
it third derivative. I'll just write f prime prime
at 0, and so forth and so on. So let's think about how we
can approximate this using polynomials of ever
increasing length. So we could have a
polynomial of just one term. And it would just
be a constant term. So this would be a
polynomial of degree 0. And if we have a constant
term, we at least might want to make that constant
polynomial it really is just a constant function equal
the function at f of 0. So at first, maybe
we just want p of 0, where p is the polynomial
that we're going to construct, we want p of 0 to
be equal to f of 0. So if we want to do that
using a polynomial of only one term, of only one
constant term, we can just set p of x
is equal to f of 0. So if I were to graph it,
it would look like this. It would just be a
horizontal line at f of 0. And you could say, Sal, that's
a horrible approximation. It only approximates the
function at this point. Looks like we got lucky at
a couple of other points, but it's really bad
everywhere else. And now I would
tell you, well, try to do any better using
a horizontal line. At least we got it
right at f of 0. So this is about as good as we
can do with just a constant. And even though I just
want to remind you this might not look
like a constant, but we're assuming that
given the function, we could evaluate
it at 0 and that will just give us a number. So whatever number that was, we
would put it right over here. We'd say p of x is
equal to that number. It would just be a horizontal
line right there at f of 0. But that obviously
is not so great. So let's add some
more constraints. Beyond the fact that we want
p of 0 to be equal to f of 0, let's say that we
also want p prime at 0 to be the same thing
as f prime at 0. Let me do this in a new color. So we also want,
in the new color, we also want that's
not a new color. We also want p prime. We want the first derivative
of our polynomial, when evaluated at 0,
to be the same thing as the first derivative of the
function when evaluated at 0. And we don't want to lose
this right over here. So what if we set p of x
as being equal to f of 0? So we're taking our old
p of x, but now we're going to add another term so
that the derivatives match up. Plus f prime of times x. So let's think about
this a little bit. If we use this as our new
polynomial, what happens? What is p is 0? p of 0 is going to
be equal to you're going to have f of 0 plus
whatever this f prime of 0 is times 0. If you put a 0 in for x, this
term is just going to be 0. So you're going to be left
with p of 0 is equal to f of 0. That's cool. That's just as good
as our first version. Now what's the
derivative over here? So the derivative is p
prime of x is equal to you take the derivative of this. This is just a constant,
so its derivative is 0. The derivative of a
coefficient times x is just going to
be the coefficient. So it's going to
be f prime of 0. So if you evaluate it
at 0 so p prime of 0. Or the derivative of
our polynomial evaluated at 0 I know it's a little
weird because we're not using we're doing a p prime of x
of f of 0 and all of this. But just remember, what's the
variable, what's the constant, and hopefully, it'll make sense. So this is just obviously
going to be f prime of 0. Its derivative is
a constant value. This is a constant
value right here. We're assuming that we can take
the derivative of our function and evaluate that thing at
0 to give a constant value. So if p prime of x is equal
to this constant value, obviously, p prime
of x evaluated at 0 is going to be that value. But what's cool about
this right here, this polynomial that has a 0
degree term and a first degree term, is now this polynomial
is equal to our function at x is equal to 0. And it also has the
same first derivative. It also has the same
slope at x is equal to 0. So this thing will look,
this new polynomial with two terms getting
a little bit better it will look
something like that. It will essentially have
it'll look like a tangent line at f of 0, at x is equal to 0. So we're doing better, but still
not a super good approximation. It kind of is going in
the same general direction as our function around 0. But maybe we can do
better by making sure that they have the
same second derivative. And to try to have the same
second derivative while still having the same first derivative
and the same value at 0, let's try to do
something interesting. Let's define p of x. So let's make it clear. This was our first try. This is our second
try right over here. And I'm about to embark
on our third try. So in our third try, my goal is
that the value of my polynomial is the same as the value
of the function at 0. They have the same
derivative at 0. And they also have the same
second derivative at 0. So let's define my
polynomial to be equal to so I'm going
to do the first two terms of these guys
right over here. So it's going to be
f of 0 plus f prime of 0 times x, so exactly
what we did here. But now let me add another term. I'll do the other
term in a new color. And I'm going to
put a 1/2 out here. And hopefully it might make
sense why I'm about to do this. Plus 1/2 times the
second derivative of our function
evaluated at 0 x squared. And when we evaluate
the derivative of this, I think you'll see
why this 1/2 is there. Because now let's evaluate
this and its derivatives at 0. So if we evaluate p of 0, p of
0 is going to be equal to what? Well, you have
this constant term. If you evaluate it at 0,
this x and this x squared are both going to be 0. So those terms are
going to go away. So p of 0 is still
equal to f of 0. If you take the derivative
of p of x so let me take the
derivative right here. I'll do it in yellow. So the derivative
of my new p of x is going to be equal to so
this term is going to go away. It's a constant term. It's going to be
equal to f prime of 0. That's the coefficient on this. Plus this is the power
rule right here 2 times 1/2 is just 1, plus f prime
prime of 0 times x. Take the 2, multiply
it times 1/2, and decrement that
2 right there. I think you now have a sense
of why we put the 1/2 there. It's making it so that we don't
end up with the 2 coefficient out front. Now what is p prime of 0? So let me write it right
here. p prime of 0 is what? Well, this term right here
is just going to be 0, so you're left with this
constant value right over here. So it's going to
be f prime of 0. So so far, our third
generation polynomial has all the properties
of the first two. And let's see how it does
on its third derivative, or I should say the
second derivative. So p prime prime of
x is equal to this is a constant, so
its derivative is 0. So you just take the
coefficient on the second term is equal to f prime prime of 0. So what's the second
derivative of p evaluated at 0? Well, it's just going to
be this constant value. It's going to be f
prime prime of 0. So notice, by adding
this term, now, not only is our polynomial value
the same thing as our function value at 0, its derivative
at 0 is the same thing as the derivative of
the function at 0. And its second derivative
at 0 is the same thing as the second derivative
of the function at 0. So we're getting
pretty good at this. And you might guess that
there's a pattern here. Every term we add, it'll allow
us to set up the situation so that the n-th derivative
of our approximation at 0 will be the same thing
as the n-th derivative of our function at 0. So in general, if we
wanted to keep doing this, if we had a lot of
time on our hands and we wanted to just keep
adding terms to our polynomial, we could and let me
do this in a new color. Maybe I'll do it in a
color I already used. We could make our
polynomial approximation. So the first term, the constant
term, will just be f of 0. Then the next term will
be f prime of 0 times x. Then the next term
will be f prime prime of 0 times
1/2 times x squared. I just rewrote that in a
slightly different order. Then the next term, if we want
to make their third derivative the same at 0, would be
f prime prime prime of 0. The third derivative
of the function at 0, times 1/2 times 1/3,
so 1 over 2 times 3 times x to the third. And we can keep going. Maybe you you'll start
to see a pattern here. Plus, if we want to make
their fourth derivatives at 0 coincide, it would
be the fourth derivative of the function. I could put a 4 up
there, but this is really emphasizing it's the fourth
derivative at 0 times 1 over and I'll change the order. Instead of writing it
in increasing order, I'll write it as 4 times 3
times 2 times x to the fourth. And you can verify
it for yourself. If we just had this
only, and if you were to take the fourth
derivative of this, evaluate it at 0,
it'll be the same thing as the fourth derivative of
the function evaluated at 0. And in general, you
can keep adding terms where the n-th term
will look like this. The n-th derivative of your
function evaluated at 0 times x to the n over n factorial. Notice this is the same
thing as 4 factorial. 4 factorial is equal to 4
times 3 times 2 times 1. You don't have to
write the 1 there, but you could put it there. This right here is the same
thing as 3 factorial 3 times 2 times 1. I didn't put the 1 there. This right here is the same
thing as 2 factorial, 2 times 1. This is the same thing. We didn't write anything,
but you could divide this by 1 factorial, which
is the same thing as 1. And you can divide
this by 0 factorial, which also happens to be 1. We won't have to study
it too much over here. But this general series that
I've kind of set up right here is called the Maclaurin series. And you can approximate
a polynomial. And we'll see it leads to
some pretty powerful results later on. But what happens and I
don't have the computing power in my brain to draw
the graph properly is that when only
the functions equal, you get that horizontal line. When you make the
function equal 0 and their first
derivatives equal at 0, then you have something that
looks like the tangent line. When you add another
degree, it might approximate the polynomial
something like this. When you add another degree, it
might look something like that. And as you keep adding
more and more degrees, when you keep adding
more and more terms, it gets closer
and closer around, especially as you get
close to x is equal to 0. But in theory, if you add
an infinite number of terms, you shouldn't be able to do
I haven't proven this to you, so that's why I'm saying that. I haven't proved it yet to you. But if you add an
infinite number of terms, all of the derivatives
should be the same. And then the function
should pretty much look like each other. In the next video, I'll do
this with some actual functions just so it makes a
little bit more sense. And just so you know,
the Maclaurin series is a special case
of the Taylor series because we're centering it at 0. And when you're doing
a Taylor series, you can pick any center point. We'll focus on the
Maclaurin right now. 

Transcript for: Maclaurin series of cos(x) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
In the last video, we hopefully set up some of the intuition for why - or I should say what - the Maclaurin series is all about, and I said at the end of the videos that a Maclaurin series is just a special case of a Taylor series. In the case of a Maclaurin series, we're approximating this function around x is equal to 0, and a Taylor series, and we'll talk about that in a future video, you can pick an arbitrary x value - or f(x) value, we should say, around which to approximate the function. But with that said, let's just focus on Maclaurin, becuase to some degree it's a little bit simpler, and that by itself can lead us to some pretty profound conclusions about mathematics, and that's actually where I'm trying to get to. So let's take the Maclurin series of some interesting functions and I'm gonna do functions where it's pretty easy to take the derivatives, and you can /keep/ taking their derivatives over and over and over and over and over again. So let's take the Maclaurin series of cosine of x, so if f(x)=cos(x), then - before I even apply this formula, that we somewhat derived in the last video, or at least got the intuitive for in the last video - let's take a bunch of derivatives of f(x), just so we have a good sense of it. So, if we take the first derivative, if we take the first derivative, derivative of cos(x) = -sin(x) if we take the derivative of that, if we take the derivative of that, derivative of sin(x) is cos(x), and we have the negative there, so it's -cos(x) so if we take the derivative of that, so this is the third derivative of cos(x), now it's just going to be positive sine of x, and if we take the derivative of that, we get cos(x) again. We get cosine of x again. So if we take the derivative of that, this is the fourth derivative, I should, I should use this notation but you get the idea, we'll get cos(x) again. And if you look at what we talked about in the last video, we want the difference - we want the function, and we want it's various derivatives evaluated at 0, so let's evaluate it at 0. So f(0), cos(0) is 1, cosine of zero is one. Whether you're talking about zero radians or zero degrees, doesn't matter, sine of zero is zero, so this is f prime of - f prime of zero, is zero. And then cos(0) is, once again, one, but we have the negative out there, so it becomes negative one. So f - the second derivative evaluated at zero is negative one. Let's take the third derivative, the third derivative evaluated at zero well, sine of zero is just zero, and then the fourth derivative evaluated at zero, cosine of zero is one. So f prime prime prime at zero is now equal to one. So you see an interesting pattern here - one, zero, negative one, zero, one, then you go to zero, then you go to negative one, zero. So if we were to apply this to find it's Maclaurin representation, what would we get? Let me do my best attempt at this. So we would get, our polynomial would be - so our polynomial approximation of cosine of x is going to be f(0), f(0) is one, and then we have one plus f'(0) times x. But f'(0) is just zero, so we're not going to have this term over there, it's going to be zero times x, I won't even take the trouble of writing it down, it would be this zero time x, then plus f prime prime or second derivative, which is negative one, so I'll write negative - negative, this is a negative one right here, this is a negative one, times x squared, times x squared, over 2 factorial - over two factorial, which in this case is just going to be two. But I'll just write it down here as two factorial, to make the pattern a little bit more obvious, and then we go to the next term, the third derivative evaluated at zero but the third derivative evaluated at zero is just zero, so this term won't be there as well, then you go to the fourth derivative, the fourth derivative evaluated at zero is positive one, so this coefficient right here is going to be a one, and so you're going to have one times x to the fourth over four factorial, so plus x to the fourth over four factorial, and I think you start seeing a pattern now. You have sign switches - and you would see this if we kept going, so you can verify it for yourself if you don't believe me - so you have a positive sign, a negative sign, a positive sign, and then a negative sign, so on and so forth, and this is, uh, one times x to the zeroth power, then you jump two to x to the squared, jump two to x to the fourth, and so if we kept that up, we'd have a positive sign, now we have a negative sign, it would be x to the sixth over six factorial, then you have a positive sign, x to the eighth over eight factorial, and then you'd have a negative sign, x to the tenth over ten factorial, and you can just keep going that way. And if you kept going with this series, this would be the polynomial representation of cosine of x. And it's frankly just kind of cool that if can be represented this way. It's a pretty simple pattern here for a trigonometric function. Once again, it kind of tells you that all of this math is connected. And we'll see, two or three videos from now, it's connected in far more profound ways then you can possibly imagine. 

Transcript for: Maclaurin series of sin(x) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
In the last video, we
took the Maclaurin series of cosine of x. We approximated it
using this polynomial. And we saw this pretty
interesting pattern. Let's see if we can
find a similar pattern if we try to approximate sine
of x using a Maclaurin series. And once again, a
Maclaurin series is really the same thing
as a Taylor series, where we are centering
our approximation around x is equal to 0. So it's just a special
case of a Taylor series. So let's take f of
x in this situation to be equal to sine of x. And let's do the same thing
that we did with cosine of x. Let's just take the
different derivatives of sine of x really fast. So if you have the first
derivative of sine of x, is just cosine of x. The second derivative
of the sine of x is the derivative of cosine of
x, which is negative sine of x. The third derivative is going
to be the derivative of this. So I'll just write
a 3 in parentheses there, instead of doing
prime, prime, prime. So the third derivative
is the derivative of this, which is
negative cosine of x. The fourth derivative
is the derivative of this, which is
positive sine of x again. So you see, just like cosine
of x, it kind of cycles after you take the
derivative enough times. And we care in order to do
the Maclaurin, series we care about evaluating the function,
and each of these derivatives at x is equal to 0. So let's do that. So for this, let me do this
in a different color, not that same blue. I'll do it in this purple color. So f that's hard
to see, I think So let's do this
other blue color. So f of 0, in this
situation, is 0. And f, the first derivative
evaluated at 0, is 1. Cosine of 0 is 1. Negative sine of 0
is going to be 0. So f prime prime, the second
derivative evaluated at 0 is 0. The third derivative
evaluated at 0 is negative 1. Cosine of 0 is 1. You have a negative out there. It is negative 1. And then the fourth
derivative evaluated at 0 is going to be 0 again. And we could keep going,
but once again, it seems like there's a pattern. 0, 1, 0, negative
1, 0, then you're going to go back to positive 1. So on and so forth. So let's find its
polynomial representation using the Maclaurin series. And just a reminder,
this one up here, this was approximately
cosine of x. And you'll get closer and
closer to cosine of x. I'm not rigorously
showing you how close, in that it's definitely
the exact same thing as cosine of x, but you get closer
and closer and closer to cosine of x as you
keep adding terms here. And if you go to
infinity, you're going to be pretty
much at cosine of x. Now let's do the same
thing for sine of x. So I'll pick a new color. This green should be nice. So this is our new p of x. So this is approximately
going to be sine of x, as we add
more and more terms. And so the first term here, f
of 0, that's just going to be 0. So we're not even going
to need to include that. The next term is
going to be f prime of 0, which is 1, times x. So it's going to be x. Then the next term is f
prime, the second derivative at 0, which we see here is 0. Let me scroll down a little bit. It is 0. So we won't have
the second term. This third term right
here, the third derivative of sine of x evaluated
at 0, is negative 1. So we're now going
to have a negative 1. Let me scroll down
so you can see this. Negative 1 this is
negative 1 in this case times x to the third
over 3 factorial. And then the next
term is going to be 0, because that's the
fourth derivative. The fourth derivative evaluated
at 0 is the next coefficient. We see that that is going to be
0, so it's going to drop off. And what you're
going to see here and actually maybe I haven't
done enough terms for you, for you to feel good about this. Let me do one more
term right over here. Just so it becomes clear. f of the fifth
derivative of x is going to be cosine of x again. The fifth derivative we'll
do it in that same color, just so it's consistent the
fifth derivative evaluated at 0 is going to be 1. So the fourth derivative
evaluated at 0 is 0, then you go to the fifth
derivative evaluated at 0, it's going to be positive 1. And if I kept doing this,
it would be positive 1 I have to write the 1
as the coefficient times x to the fifth over 5 factorial. So there's something
interesting going on here. For cosine of x, I had 1,
essentially 1 times x to the 0. Then I don't have x
to the first power. I don't have x to the
odd powers, actually. And then I just essentially have
x to all of the even powers. And whatever power it is, I'm
dividing it by that factorial. And then the signs
keep switching. I shouldn't say this is an even
power, because 0 really isn't. Well, I guess you can
view it as an even number, because well I won't
go into all of that. But it's essentially 0, 2,
4, 6, so on and so forth. So this is
interesting, especially when you compare to this. This is all of the odd powers. This is x to the first
over 1 factorial. I didn't write it here. This is x to the
third over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth
over 5 factorial. Yeah, 0 would be an even number. Anyway, my brain is in a
different place right now. And you could keep going. If we kept this process
up, you would then keep switching sines. X to the seventh over
7 factorial plus x to the ninth over 9 factorial. So there's something
interesting here. You once again see this
kind of complimentary nature between sine and cosine here. You see almost
this they're kind of filling each
other's gaps over here. Cosine of x is all
of the even powers of x divided by that
power's factorial. Sine of x, when you take its
polynomial representation, is all of the odd powers of
x divided by its factorial, and you switch sines. In the next video,
I'll do e to the x. And what's really
fascinating is that e to the x starts to look like
a little bit of a combination here, but not quite. And you really do
get the combination when you involve
imaginary numbers. And that's when it starts to
get really, really mind blowing. 

Transcript for: Maclaurin series of e_ | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Now let's do something
pretty interesting. And this will, to some degree,
be one of the easiest functions to find the Maclaurin
series representation of. But let's try to
approximate e to the x. f of x is equal to e to the x. And what makes
this really simple is, when you take the
derivative and this is, frankly, one of the amazing
things about the number e is that when you take the
derivative of e to the x, you get e to the x. So this is equal
to f prime of x. This is equal to f, the
second derivative of x. This is equal to the
third derivative of x. This is equal to the
n-th derivative of x. It's always equal to e to the x. That's kind of the
first mind blowing thing about the number e. It's just, you could keep
taking its derivative. The slope at any
point on that curve is the same as the value of
that point on that curve. That's kind of crazy. Anyway, with that said,
let's take its Maclaurin representation. So we have to find f
of 0, f prime of 0, the second derivative at 0. Well, when you take e to the 0,
e to the 0 is just equal to 1. And so this is going
to be equal to f of 0. This is going to be
equal to f prime of 0. It's going to be equal to any of
the derivatives evaluated at 0. The n-th derivative
evaluated at 0. And that's why it makes
applying the Maclaurin series formula fairly straightforward. If I wanted to
approximate e to the x using a Maclaurin series
so e to the x and I'll put a little
approximately over here. And we'll get closer and
closer to the real e to the x as we keep adding
more and more terms. And especially if we had an
infinite number of terms, it would look like
this. f of 0 let me do it in what colors
did I use for cosine and sine? So I used pink and I used green. So let me use a
non-pink, non-green. I'll use the yellow here. So f of 0 is 1 plus f prime
of 0 times x. f prime of 0 is also 1. So plus x plus, this
is also 1, so it's going to be x squared
over 2 factorial. So plus x squared
over 2 factorial. All of these things
are going to be 1. This is 1, this is 1, when
we're talking about e to the x. So you go to the third term. This is 1. You just have x to the
third over 3 factorial. Plus x to the third
over 3 factorial. And I think you see
the pattern here. We just keep adding terms.
x to the fourth over 4 factorial plus x
to the fifth over 5 factorial plus x to the
sixth over 6 factorial. And something pretty neat
is starting to emerge. Is that e to x, 1 this is just
really cool that e to the x can be approximated by
1 plus x plus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to
the third over 3 factorial. Once again, e to
the x is starting to look like a
pretty cool thing. This also leads to other
interesting results. That if you wanted
to approximate e, you just evaluate this
at x is equal to 1. So if you wanted to
approximate e, you'd say e is approximate to well,
e is e to the first power. And that's going
to be approximately equal to this polynomial
evaluated at 1. If x is 1 here, we
make x 1 over here. So it'll be 1 plus 1. So it'll be 1 plus 1
plus 1 over 2 factorial, plus 1 over 3 factorial,
plus 1 over 4 factorial. So on and so forth, all
the way into infinity. And you could also view this
as 1 over 1 factorial as well. 1 over 1 factorial. But what's really cool is this
is another really neat way to represent e. It shows that e once again shows
up in this kind of neat thing. It's kind of 2 plus
1/2, plus 1/6, plus if you just keep doing this,
you get close to the number e. But that by itself isn't
the only fascinating thing. If we look back at our
Maclaurin representations of these other
functions, cosine of x let me copy and
paste cosine of x. So cosine of x right up here. So let me do my best to copy
and paste the whole thing. So copy and paste. Copy and paste. So that is cosine of x. And let's do the same
thing for the sine of x that we did last video. So the sine of x. Let me copy and paste that. Copy, and then
let me paste that. Edit, paste. So do we see any relationship
between these approximations? So before, you probably
would have guessed maybe there's some relationship
between cosine and sine, but what about e to the x? And what you see
here is that cosine of x looks a lot like
this term plus this term, although we would want to put
a negative out front here. So it's a negative version
of this term right here, plus this term right here,
plus a negative version of this term right over here. And sine of x looks
just like this term plus a negative version of
this term, plus this term, plus a negative version
of the next term. So if we could somehow
reconcile the negatives in some interesting
way, it looks like e to the x is
somehow or at least its polynomial representation
of e to the x is somehow related
to a combination of the polynomial
representations of cosine of x and sine of x. So this is starting to get
really, really, really cool. We're starting to see a
connection between something related to compound interest or
a function whose derivative is always equal to that function. And these things that
come out of the unit circle in oscillatory motion
and all of those things, there starts to seem some type of
pure connectedness there. But I'll leave you
there in that video. And in the next
video, I'll show you how we can actually
reconcile these three fascinating functions. 

Transcript for: Euler's formula & Euler's identity | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Voiceover: In the last video, we took the Maclaurin expansion of E to the X and we saw that it looked
like it was some type a combination of the
polynomial approximations of cosine of X and of sine of X. But it's not quite, because there's a couple of negatives in there. If we were to add these
two together that we did not have when we took the representation of E to the X. But to reconcile these,
I'll do a little bit of a I don't know if you can
even call it a trick. Let's see if we take
this polynomial expansion of E to the X, this
approximation, what happens if we say E to the X is equal to this, especially as this
becomes an infinite number of terms and becomes
less of an approximation and more of an equality. What happens if I take
E to the IX and before that might have been kind
of a weird thing to do. Let me write it down, E to the IX. Because before, I said how do you define E to the Ith power? That's a very bizarre thing to do, take something to the XI power. How do you even comprehend some type of a function like that. But now that we can have
a polynomial expansion of E to the X, we can
maybe make sense of it. Because we can take I to different amounts to different powers and
we know what that gives, I squared is negative one, I
to the third is negative I, and so on and so forth. So what happens if we take E to the IX. So once again, just like
taking the X up here and replacing it with
an IX, so every where we see the X in it's
polynomial approximation, we would write an IX. So let's do that. So E to the IX should be
approximately equal to, and it will become more and more equal, and this is more to give
you an intuition I'm not doing a rigorous proof here,
but it's still profound. Not to oversell it,
but I don't think I can oversell what is about
to be discovered or seen in this video, it would
be equal to one plus instead of an X will have
an IX, plus IX, plus, so what's IX squared? So let me write this down. What is IX squared over two factorial? Well I squared is going
to be negative one, and then you'd have X
squared over two factorials. It's going to be minus X
squared over two factorial, I think you might see
where this is going to go. And then what is IX? Remember everywhere we saw an X, we're going to replace it with an IX. So what is IX to the third power? Actually let me write this out, let me not skip some steps over here. So this is going to be IX
squared over two factorial, actually let me, I want
to do it just the way. So plus IX squared over two factorial, plus IX to the third over three factorial, plus IX to the fourth over four factorial, and we can keep going,
plus IX to the fifth over five factorial, and
we can just keep going so on and so forth. Let's evaluate if these
IXs raised to these different powers. So this will be equal to one plus IX, IX squared, that's the
same thing as I squared times X squared, I
squared is negative one. So this is negative X
squared over two factorial, and this is going to be the same thing as I to the third times X to the third. I to the third is the same thing as I squared times I, so it's
going to be negative I. So this is going to be minus I times X to the third over three factorial. So then plus, you're going to have, what's I to the fourth power? So that's I squared squared. So that's negative one
squared, that's just going to be one. So I to the fourth is one and then you have X to the fourth. Plus X to the fourth over four factorial. And then you're going
to have, I don't even write the plus yet, I to the fifth. So I to the fifth is
going to be one times I, so it's going to be I times X to the fifth over five factorials plus
I times X to the fifth over five factorial. I think you might see a pattern here. Coefficient is one, then
I, then negative one, then negative I, then one,
then I, then negative one, X to the sixth over six factorial, and then negative IX to the seventh over seven factorial. So we have some terms,
some of them are imaginary, they're being multiplied by I. Some of them are real. Why don't we separate them out? So once again, E to the IX, is going to be equal to this thing, especially as we add an infinite number of terms. Let's separate out the real
and the non-real terms. Or the real and the
imaginary terms I should say. So this is real, this
is real, this is real, and this right over here is real. And obviously we could
keep going on with that. So the real terms here are one minus X squared over two factorial plus X to the fourth over four factorial, you might be getting excited now, minus X to the sixth over six factorial and that's all I've done
here, but they would keep going so plus so on and so forth. So that's all of the real terms. And what are the imaginary terms here. And I'll just factor out the I over here. Actually, let me just factor out. So it's going to be plus I times,
well this is IX, so this will be X. And then the next, so
that's an imaginary term, this is an imaginary term. We're factoring out the
I, so minus X to the third over three factorial, and then the next imaginary term is right over there. We factor out the I,
plus X to the fifth over five factorial and then
the next imaginary term is right there, we factored out the I. So it's minus X to the
seventh over seven factorial. And then we would obviously keep going. So plus minus keep going,
so on and so forth, preferably to infinite
so that we get as good of a approximation as possible. So we have a situation where E to the IX is equal to all of this business here. But you probably remember
from the last two videos the real part, this was the polynomial, this was the Maclaurin
approximation of cosine of X around I should say
the Taylor approximation around zero or you could also call it the Maclaurin approximation. So this and this are the same thing. So this is cosine of
X, especially when you added an infinite power
of terms, cosine of X. This over here is sine of
X, the exact same thing. So it looks like we're
able to reconcile how you can add up cosine of X and sine of X to get something that's like E of the X. This right here is sine of X. And so if we take it for granted, I'm not rigorously proving it to you, and if you were to take an infinite number of terms here that this
will essentially become cosine of X and if you
take an infinite number of terms here this will become sine of X. It leads to a fascinating formula. We could say that E to the IX, is the same thing as cosine of X,
and you should be getting goose pimples right around now. is equal to cosine of X,
plus I times sine of X, This is Euler's Formula. And this right here is Euler's Formula. And if that by itself isn't exciting and crazy enough for you,
because is really should be. Because we've already done
some pretty cool things. We're involving E, which we get from continuous compounding interest. We have cosine and sine
of X, which are ratios of right triangles, it comes
out of the unit circle. And some how we've
thrown in the square root of negative one. There seems to be this
cool relationship here. But it becomes extra
cool, and we're going to assume we're operating in radians here. If we assume Euler's Formula, what happens when X is equal to pi? Just to throw in another
wacky number in there. The ratio between the circumference and the diameter of a cirle. What happens when we throw in pi? We get E to the Ipi is
equal to cosine of pi. Cosine of pi is what? Pi is half way around the unit circle, so cosine of pi is negative one and then sine of pi is zero, so
this term goes away. So if you evaluated at pi
you get something amazing, it's called Euler's Identity. I always have trouble pronouncing Euler's. Euler's Identity, which
we could write like this, or we could add one to both sides and we could write it like this. And I'll write it in
different colors for emphasis. E to the I times pi plus one is equal to , I'll do that in a neutral color, is equal to, I'm just
adding one to both sides of this thing right over
here, is equal to zero. And this is thought provoking. I mean here we have, this
tells you that there's some connectedness to the universe that we don't fully understand or at least I don't fully understand. I is defined by engineers
for simplicity so that they can find the roots of
all sorts of polynomials. As you could say the square
root of negative one. Pi is the ratio between the circumference of a circle and it's diameter. Once again another interesting number but seems like it comes from
a different place as I. E comes from a bunch of different places. E you could either think of it comes out of continuing compounding interest, super valuable for finance. It also comes from the
notion that the derivative of E to the X is also E to the X, another fascinating number. But once again seemingly
unrelated to how we came up with I and seemingly unrelated with how we came up with pi. And then of course you
have some of the most profound basic numbers right over here. You have one, I don't have to explain why one is a cool number. And I shouldn't have to explain
why zero is a cool number. And so this right here connects all of these fundamental
numbers in some mystical way that shows that there's some connectedness to the universe. So frankly, if this
does not blow your mind, you really have no emotion. 

Transcript for: Visualizing Taylor series approximations | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
I've talked a lot
about using polynomials to approximate functions, but
what I want to do in this video is actually show you that
the approximation is actually happening. So right over here and I'm
using WolframAlpha for this. It's a very cool website. You can do all sorts of crazy
mathematical things on it. So WolframAlpha.com I got this
copied and pasted from them. I met Steven Wolfram at a
conference not too long ago. He said yes, you
should definitely use WolframAlpha in your videos. And I said, great. I will. And so that's what
I'm doing right here. And it's super useful,
because what it does is and we could
have calculated a lot of this on
our own, or even done it on a graphic calculator. But you usually can do it just
with one step on WolframAlpha is see how well we can
approximate sine of x using you could call it a
Maclaurin series expansion, or you could call it a
Taylor series expansion at x is equal to 0 using
more and more terms. And having a good
feel for the fact that the more terms we add, the
better it hugs the sine curve. So this over here in
orange is sine of x. That should hopefully look
fairly familiar to you. And in previous
videos, we figured out what that Maclaurin
expansion for sine of x is. And WolframAlpha does
it for us as well. They actually calculate
the factorials. 3 factorial is 6, 5 factorial
is 120, so on and so forth. But what's interesting
here is you can pick how many of
the approximations you want to graph. And so what they did
is if you want just one term of the
approximation so if we didn't have this whole thing. If we just said that our
polynomial is equal to x, what does that look like? Well, that's going to be
this graph right over here. They tell us which
term how many terms we used by how many dots there are
right over here, which I think is pretty clever. So this right here, that is the
function p of x is equal to x. And so it's a very
rough approximation, although for sine of x,
it doesn't do a bad job. It hugs the sine curve
right over there. And then it starts to veer
away from the sine curve again. You add another term. So if you have the x minus
x to the third over 6. So now you have two
terms in the expansion. Or I guess we should say we
were up to the third-order term, because that's how their
numbering the dots. Because they're not talking
about the number of terms. They're talking about
the order of the terms. So they have one
dot here, because we have only one first-degree term. When we have two
terms here, since we when you do the
expansion for sine of x, it doesn't have a
second-degree term. We now have a third-degree
polynomial approximation. And so let's look
at the third-degree. We should look for three dots. That's this curve
right over here. So if you just have
that first term, you just get that straight line. You add the negative x to
the third over 6 to that x. You now get a curve
that looks like this. And notice it starts hugging
sine a little bit earlier. And it keeps hugging
it a little bit later. So once again, just
adding that second term does a pretty good job. It hugs the sine
curve pretty well, especially around
smaller numbers. You add another term. And now we're at an order five
polynomial, right over here. So x minus x to the third over
6 plus x to the fifth over 120. So let's look for the five dots. So that's this one right over
here one, two, three, four, five. So that's this curve
right over here. And notice it begins hugging
the line a little bit earlier than the magenta
version, and it keeps hugging it a little bit longer. Then it flips back up like this. So it hugged it a
little bit longer. And you can see I'll keep going. If you have all these
first four terms, it gives us a seventh
degree polynomial. So let's look for the
seven dots over here. So they come in just like this. And then once again, it hugs the
curve sooner than when we just had the first three terms. And it keeps hugging the
curve all the way until here. And then the last one. If you have all of these
terms up to x to the ninth, it does it even more. You start here. It hugs the curve
longer than the others. And goes out. And if you think about
it, it makes sense, because what's happening here is
each successive term that we're adding to the expansion,
they have a higher degree of x over a much, much,
much, much larger number. So for small x
value so when you're close to the origin
for small x values, this denominator is
going to overpower the numerator, especially
when you're below 1. Because when you
take something that has absolute value
less than 1 to a power, you're actually
shrinking it down. So when you're
close to the origin, these latter terms
don't matter much. So you're kind of
not losing some of the precision of some
of the earlier terms. When these tweaking
terms come in, these come in when
the numerator can start to overpower
the denominator. So this last term, it starts
to become relevant out here, where all of a sudden x to the
ninth can overpower 362,880. And the same thing
on the negative side. So hopefully this
gives you a sense. We only have one, two,
three, four, five terms here. Imagine what would
happen if we had an infinite number of terms. I think you get a
pretty good sense that it would kind of hug the
sine curve out to infinity. So hopefully that makes you feel
a little bit better about this. And for fun, you
might want to go type in you can type in
Taylor expansion at 0 and sine of x, or Maclaurin
expansion or Maclaurin series for sine of x,
cosine of x, e to the x, at WolframAlpha.com. And try it out for a bunch
of different functions. And you can keep adding
or taking away terms to see how well
it hugs the curve. 

Transcript for: Taylor & Maclaurin polynomials intro (part 2) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
In the last several
videos, we learned how we can approximate
an arbitrary function, but a function that is
differentiable and twice and thrice differentiable
and all of the rest. How we can approximate a
function around x is equal to 0 using a polynomial. If we just have a
zero-degree polynomial, which is just a constant,
you can approximate it with a horizontal line that
just goes through that point. Not a great approximation. If you have a
first-degree polynomial, you can at least get the
slope right at that point. If you get to a
second-degree polynomial, you can get something that
hugs the function a little bit longer. If you go to a
third-degree polynomial, maybe something that hugs
the function even a little bit longer than that. But all of that was
focused on approximating the function around
x is equal to 0. And that's why we call it the
Maclaurin series or the Taylor series at x is equal to 0. What I want to do now is
expand it a little bit, generalize it a little bit, and
focus on the Taylor expansion at x equals anything. So let's say we
want to approximate this function when x
so this is our x-axis when x is equal to c. So we can do the
exact same thing. We could say, look,
our first approximation is that our polynomial
at c should be equal to or actually, even let me better
it our polynomial could just be if it's just
going to be a constant, it should at least
equal to function whatever the
function equals at c. So it should just equal f
of c. f of c is a constant. It's that value
right over there. We're assuming that c is given. And then you would
have this would just be a horizontal line
that goes through f of c. That's p of x is
equal to f of c. Not a great
approximation, but then we could try to go for having
this constraint matched, plus having the
derivative matched. So what this constraint
gave us just as a reminder this gave
us the fact that at least p of c, the approximation at c,
our polynomial at c, at least is going to be equal
to f of c, right? If you put c over
here, it doesn't change what's on
the right-hand side, because this is just
going to be a constant. Now, let's get the
constraint one more step. What if we want a situation
where this is true, and we want the derivative
of our polynomial to be the same thing as the
derivative of our function when either of them are at c. So for this situation, what
if we set up our polynomial and you'll see a
complete parallel to what we did in earlier videos. We're just going to shift
it a little bit for the fact that we're not at 0. So now, let's define p of x
to be equal to f of c plus f prime of c. So whatever the slope is at this
point of the function, whatever the function slope
is, times and you're going to see something
slightly different over here x minus c. Now, let's think about
what this minus c is doing. So let's test, first of
all, that we didn't mess up our previous constraint. So let's evaluate this at c. So now, we know that
p of c and I'm using this exact
example so p of c let me do this in a new color. Let me try it out. So p that's not a new color. p of c is going to be equal
to f of c plus f prime of c times c minus c. Wherever you see an x, you
put a c in there. c minus c. Well, this term right over
here is going to be 0. And so this whole term right
over here is going to be 0. And so you're just left with
p of c is equal to f of c. You're just left with that
constraint right over there. And the only reason why
we were able to blank out this second term right over here
is because we had f prime of c times x minus c. The x minus c makes all of the
terms after this irrelevant. We can go now verify
that this is now true. So let's try p
prime of x is going to be the derivative of this,
which is just 0, because this is going to be a constant,
plus the derivative of this right over here. And what's that going to be? Well, that's going to be
you can expand this out to be f prime of c
times x minus f prime of c times c, which
would just be constant. So if you take the derivative
of this thing right here, you're just going to be
left with an f prime of c. So the derivative of our
polynomial is now constant. So obviously, if you
were to evaluate this at c, p prime at c, you're
going to get f prime of c. So once again, it meets
the second constraint. And now when you have
both of these terms, maybe our approximation will
look something like this. It will at least have the
right slope as f of x. Our approximation is
getting a little bit better. And if we keep doing
this and we're using the exact same logic
that we used when we did it around 0, when we did
the Maclaurin expansion you get the general Taylor
expansion for the approximation of f of x around c
to be the polynomial. So the polynomial p of x
is going to be equal to and I'll just expand it out. And this is very similar
to what we saw before. f of c plus f prime
of c times x minus c. You might even guess what the
next few terms are going to be. It's the exact same logic. Watch the videos
on Maclaurin series where I go for a few
more terms into it. It becomes a little
bit more complicated taking the second and
third derivatives, and all of the rest
just because you have to expand out
these binomials, but it's the exact same logic. So then you have plus
your second-degree term, f prime prime of c,
divided by 2 factorial. And this is just like what we
saw in the Maclaurin expansion. And just to be
clear, you could say that there's a 1
factorial down here. I didn't take the
trouble to write it because it doesn't
change the value. And then that times
x minus c squared plus the third derivative
of the function evaluated at c over
3 factorial times x minus c to the third power. And I think you get
the general idea. You can keep adding more and
more and more terms like this. Unfortunately, it makes
it a little bit harder, especially if you're
willing to do the work. It's not so bad, but instead of
having just x here and instead of just having an
x squared here, and having an (x-c) squared having an (x-c) to the third,
this makes the analytical math a little bit hairier, a
little bit more difficult. But this will
approximate your function better as you add
more and more terms or on an arbitrary value
as opposed to just around x is equal to 0. And I'll show you that using
WolframAlpha in the next video. 

Transcript for: Visualizing Taylor polynomial approximations | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Let's say we've got the function
f of x is equal to e to the x. And just to get a sense
of what that looks like, let me do a rough drawing of
f of x is equal to e to the x. It would look
something like this. So that is e to the x. And what I want to do is
I want to approximate f of x is equal to e to the
x using a Taylor series approximation, or a
Taylor series expansion. And I want to do it not
around x is equal to 0. I want to do it around
x is equal to 3, just to pick another
arbitrary value. So we're going to do it
around x is equal to 3. This is x is equal to 3. This right there. That is f of 3. f of 3 is e to the third power. So this is e to the third
power right over there. So when we take the
Taylor series expansion, if we have a 0 degree
polynomial approximating it, the best we could probably do
is have a constant function going straight through
e to the third. If we do a first
order approximation, so we have a first
degree term, then it will be the tangent line. And as we add more and
more degrees to it, we should hopefully be
able to kind of contour or converge with the curve
better and better and better. And in the future, we'll
talk a little bit more about how we can
test for convergences and how well are we converging
and all that type of thing. But with that said, let's
just apply the formula that hopefully we
got the intuition for in the last video. So the Taylor series
expansion for f of x is equal to e to the
x will be the polynomial. So what's f of c? Well, if x is equal
to 3, we're saying that c is 3 in this situation. So if c is 3, f of 3 is
e to the third power. So it's e to the third power
plus what's f prime of c? Well f prime of x is also
going to be e to the x. You take the derivative of e
to the x, you get e to the x. That's one of the super cool
things about e to the x. So this is also f prime of x. Frankly, this is the same thing
as f the nth derivative of x. You could just keep
taking the derivative of this and you'll
get e to the x. So f prime of x is e to the x. You evaluate that at 3, you
get e to the third power again times x minus 3, c is
3, plus the second derivative our function is
still e to the x, evaluate that at 3, you get
e to the third power over 2 factorial times x minus
3 to the second power. And then we could keep going. The third derivative
is still e to the x. Evaluate that at 3. c
is 3 in this situation. So you get e to the third
power over 3 factorial times x minus 3 to the third power. And we can keep going
with this, but I think you get the general idea. But what's even more interesting
than just kind of going through the mechanics of
finding the expansion, is seeing how as we add
more and more terms, it starts to approximate e
to the x better and better and better. And our approximation gets
good further and further away from x is equal to 3. And to do that, I
used WolframAlpha, available at wolframalpha.com. And I think I typed in
Taylor series expansion e to the x and x equals 3. And it just knew what
I wanted and gave me all of this business
right over here. And it actually
calculated the expansion. And you can see it's
the exact same thing that we have over here, e to the
third plus e to the third times x minus 3. We have e to the third plus e
to the third times x minus 3 plus 1/2. They actually expanded
out the factorial. So instead of 3 factorial,
they wrote a 6 over here. And they did a bunch
of terms up here. But what's even more interesting
is that they actually graph each of these polynomials
with more and more terms. So in orange, we
have e to the x. We have f of x is
equal to e to the x. And then they tell us,
"order n approximation shown with n dots." So the order one
approximation, so that should be the situation where we
have a first degree polynomial, so that's literally a
first degree polynomial would be these two
terms right over here. Because this is a 0-th degree,
this is a first degree. We just have x to the
first power involved here. If we just were to plot this
if this was our polynomial, that is plotted with 1 dot. And that is this one right
over here, with one dot, and they plot it
right over here. And we can see that
it's just a tangent line at x is equal to 3. That is x is equal to
3 right over there. And so this is the tangent line. If we add a term, now we're
getting to a second degree polynomial, because we're
adding an x squared. If you expand this out,
you'll have an x squared term, and then you'll
have another x term, but the degree of the polynomial
will now be a second degree. So let's look for two dots. So that's this one
right over here. So let's see, two dots. Two dots coming in. See, you'll notice
one, two dots. So you have two dots,
and it comes in. And this is a parabola. It's a second degree
polynomial, and then it comes back like this. But notice it does a better job,
especially around x equals 3, of approximating e to the x. It stays with the curve
a little bit longer. You add another term let me
do this in a new color, a color that I have not used. You add another term. Now you have a third
degree polynomial. If you have all
of these combined, if this is your polynomial, and
you were to graph that and so let's look for the three
dots right over here. So one, two, three. So it's this curve. Third degree polynomial is
this curve right over here. And notice, it
starts contouring e to the x a little bit sooner
than the second degree version. And it stays with it
a little bit longer. And so you have
it just like that. You add another term to it,
you add the fourth degree term to it. So now we have all of
this plus all of this. If this is your
polynomial, now you have this curve right over here. Notice every time
you add a term, it's getting better and
better at approximating e to the x further and further
away from x is equal to 3. And then if you add another
term, you get this one up here. But hopefully that
satisfies you, that we are getting closer and
closer, the more terms we add. So you can imagine it's a
pretty darn good approximation as we approach adding an
infinite number of terms. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 1)
Let's say I have this
bizarre-looking function. It's just some
arbitrary function. And we'll call that f of x. So this function right
there is f of x. And what we're going to do in
this video is, it's not an experiment, but we're going to
play around a little bit, and we're going to try to
approximate this function using a polynomial with
some coefficients. And this polynomial we're going
to do, we're going to keep adding terms to the polynomial,
so that we can better and better approximate
this function. And that's actually
called a power series. And we'll do more about that
later, but we're going to specifically try, in this case,
to approximate the function around x is equal to 0. So around this point. So the easiest way to
approximate it is to say, well, the simplest polynomial is
just a constant, right? Let's say this is my
polynomial, let me call my polynomial p of x. The simplest polynomial is just
a constant, and it would just be a horizontal line someplace. So if I just wanted this one
term polynomial, what would be my best approximation for this
function, at least at this point? Well, I could just set p
of x is equal to f of 0. And in that case, p of x would
just look like a horizontal line going through f of 0. It would just look like that. I'm going to erase that now,
just so I don't dirty up this picture too much. But that's, you could say,
a very rough approximation of f of x, right? So that's a start. Well, what would be one way
to approximate it even more? Well, what if not only does p
of x equal f of 0 at x is equal to 0, so that horizontal line
we did, we got p of 0 is equal to f of 0, so we knew that at x
equals 0, at least that horizontal line is the same
value of f of x, that's a very rough approximation. But what if we set it up so
that the derivative of p of 0 is equal to the derivative
of the function at 0? All of a sudden, this could be
a little bit more interesting. So how could we set
it up like that? Well, what if we set p of x,
and I'm doing it very general, and we're going to do specific
examples, and actually, the first example we're going to do
is probably the coolest one. So what if p of x is equal to,
well, the constant term is f of 0, and then it's plus the
derivative of this function, so the slope of this function at
that point, f prime of 0 times x. Let's say I'm defining,
so this is a polynomial. I just added a first
degree term here. I had a constant, and now I'm
adding a first degree term. And let me confirm that this
will have the same derivative. So let's see. First of all, let's confirm
that p of 0 is equal to f of 0. Well, p of 0 is equal to f of
0 plus f prime of 0 times 0. Well, this last term just
goes to, is nothing, right? Times 0. So that checks out. At x is equal to 0,
the two functions are equal to each other. Now let me confirm that their
derivative, their first derivatives are the same. So what's the first
derivative of p? p prime of x is equal to,
well, the derivative of a constant term is 0, right? Plus, and what's the derivative
of a next term, of a first degree term? Well, it's just f prime of 0. So this checks out. My new polynomial that I've
defined right here is equal to the function f at x is equal to
0, and its derivative is equal to the function f at
x is equal to 0. So what would it look like? Well, it would intersect, at
x is equal to 0, the two functions would overlap. And also, they would have the
same slope at that point. So whatever f of x is
doing, that function's going to be doing. So it's going to look something
like, I'm going to try my best to, it's going to look
something like that. And so that is a better
approximation, if we had to use a line, that's as good as any,
especially around 0, of what f of x is. f of x might have been some
really crazy weirdo function, but we were able to approximate
it reasonably well with this very simple linear equation. Well, that's all good, but
let's approximate it with a quadratic equation, with adding
another x squared term. And we're going to do that way,
but we're going to say, well, we said, when at x is equal
to 0, the functions equal each other. That's what we did here. Then we said, the derivatives
equal each other, and so we added this term. And now I'm going to say, what
happens when their second derivatives equal each other? So what has to happen for
their second derivatives to equal each other? Well, let's try out this,
and I think you'll start to see the intuition here. Let me define my new p of x,
so let me add another term. p of x, the first terms
are going to be the same. They're going to be f of 0. Remember, this is just
a constant term. Plus f prime of 0, the
first derivative at 0, the slope at 0 times x. Plus f prime prime, the second
derivative of the function at 0, times x squared over 2. Now you're probably saying,
why are you multiplying it by 1/2 here? And you'll see, and maybe
you'll even realize it, when you take a second derivative,
what happens, right? You multiply the expression by
the exponents so you can have a 2 come down, it's going to
cancel out with the 1/2. And that's why I
put the 1/2 there. So that when I take the
derivative, that 2 and the 1/2 cancel out, and I'm just left
with the second derivative of the original function. So let me confirm that. So p of 0 is equal to f of 0
plus, well when x is equal to 0, that's 0, this term is 0,
and when x is equal to 0, that term is 0, right? So that checks out. What's the first
derivative of p? The first derivative of p is
going to be, up here, this was the first derivative
of p at 0, right? So what's the first
derivative of p? Well, the constant term becomes
0, plus oh, actually, no, this was actually of x, sorry. I shouldn't go back on my work,
I know it best when I'm doing it the first time around. Anyway. The first derivative of p of x,
this is my current p of x, this constant term, derivative of 0. This x term, the derivative
is f prime of 0. And then, what's the
derivative of this term? Well, we take the exponent,
multiply it by the expression. We have 2 times 1/2,
that cancels out. So we're just left with
f prime prime of 0 x. Right? You take the exponent, multiply
by the whole thing, and then decrement the exponent by 1. So what is p prime of 0? What is the derivative at 0? Well, it equals,
this is nothing. It equals f prime of 0
plus, and, well, this term's going to be 0. So that checks out. And so what's the
third derivative? Let me clean up some of
the stuff on the top. Since this is our current f
of x anyway, I can clean up all of this stuff. Let me clean up all of this. So what is the third derivative
of this p that I defined here? This is our current p. Well, the third derivative is
going to be, so p prime prime prime of x, we could have also
written p3 of x, is equal to the derivative of this. Oh, sorry, we're not on
the third, we're only on the second derivative. p, and I'll write prime prime,
I was going to write a 2 there. p prime prime of x. That equals what? That's the derivative of this. So there was a 0 here,
that goes to nothing. This is now a constant term,
that becomes nothing. And then we take the
derivative of this term. Well, we just, it's
a constant times x. Remember, this might look like
a function or some variable. It's just a constant. Because we evaluated this
curvy function, it's second derivative 0, so we
just got a number here. So this derivative is
just this number. So it equals f
prime prime of 0. And so our current p of x has
the same value when x is equal to 0 as f of x, it has the same
first derivative at xis equal to zero as f of x, it has
the same second derivative. And I don't, this is getting
beyond my visualization ability, especially for an
arbitrary function like this, but I could guess that maybe
it looks something like this. I don't know. Maybe it looks, maybe our new
function will curve, and it'll approximate it a little
bit better, and then maybe it'll come down like that. I don't know. I'm just guessing. But around x is equal to 0,
it's going to be a better approximation of f of x. Well, we could just keep doing
this, and actually, we will keep doing this, and you know,
just saying, well, the zeroth derivative, or at the value, is
the same the first derivative is the same at 0, the second
derivative is the same at 0, we'll say the third derivative,
the fourth derivative, and we'll keep doing that. And I only have 20 seconds left
in this video, so we will continue that in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 2)
So where we left off in the
last video, we kept trying to approximate this purple f
of x with a polynomial. And we at first said we'll just
make the polynomial a constant and set it  it's just going
to intersect f of 0 at x is equal to 0. So that's a first  you can
kind of all think of it as a 0 of order approximation
of the function. Then we said, oh, what if not
only do they intersect at x is equal to 0, but let's say that
their slope is the same as x is equal to 0, and that's
that approximation? And that's about as good as
you're going to do with a line, especially as
you get close to 0. And we said, OK, that's good,
but what if their second derivative is the same? And that's where we ended
up with  we added this term here. And I hinted that we'll just
keep doing this process. And so you could imagine, if I
want the third derivative to be the same, I could add another
term right here, plus, where I know what the value of f of
x's third derivative is at 0. So I'll write that as f to
the third derivative at 0 times x to the third. Now what do you think is
going to be down here? What's going to be
he denominator? You might be tempted to say
that we'll put a 3 down here. But it turns out you're going
to put a 3 times a 2, which is a 6, or 3 factorial. Now why is that? Let me just take a little
departure here and I think you'll start to understand
why you put a 6 down here. Why this isn't a 3
and you put a 6. Here you put a 2, but 2 is
also 2 factorial, right? 2 factorial is 2
times 1, right? Hopefully you remember what
factorial  actually, let me tell you what factorial
is just in case. 10 factorial is equal to 10
times 9 times 8 times 7, dah, dah, dah, dah, times 2 times 1. So you're multiplying all of
the numbers up to that number. 4 factorial  and the numbers
get big very, very fast  is 4 times 3 times 2 times 1. 2 factorial is equal
to 2 times 1. 1 factorial is equal to 1. Now this is kind of
a weird definition. It comes out of combinatorics. Actually it works for what
we're doing is, well, 0 factorial is also equal to 1. I know that might be a
little un-intuitive. This is just a definition. It's like saying that i squared
is equal to negative 1. It is a definition that it
makes formulas be more general, I guess is a
simple way to put it. But let me erase all of this
because that was just a divergence just because I
realized I was going to use factorial, so you should
know what a factorial is. But I think that's a fairly
straightforward concept. So going back to
what we were doing. I was asking you why do I put
a 6 down here instead of a 3, like we put a 2 here? Well, let's just take
this term alone and take its third derivative. So if I have the term and it's
f, the third derivative at 0, x to the third over  and
let me just write 6 as 3 times 2 or 2 times 3. That'll make it a
little more clear. What's the first
derivative here? What happens when I take
the derivative once? Well, I'm going to multiply the
whole thing by the 6 exponent and decrement the
exponent, right? So I'm going to multiply the
whole thing times 3 times f, the third derivative, x
squared over 2 times 3. So that first time I did
it, this 3 and this 3 cancel out, right? That red's looking a
little bit too demonic. Let me pick another color. And then when I take the
second derivative what am I going to get? Well, the 3's gone, now I just
have a 2 in the denominator, so I multiply the whole thing by 2
times f prime prime prime of 0 times, and I decrement the
exponent, x to the 1 over 2. Well, now the 2's
cancel out, right? So the reason why you're
putting a factorial there is every time you take a
derivative you're decrementing the exponent 1, and multiplying
the whole expression by the exponent. So if you're going to take n
derivative, you're essentially going to be multiplying this
expression times n factorial. So you don't want an n
factorial out here. You put an n factorial
at the bottom. Hopefully that makes sense. Play around with it yourself
and it should start to make a little bit more sense. So in general, if we just
kept doing this process forever, what would the
function look like? The reason why I'm covering
this is because going this way we're going to be able to prove
what I think is the most mind-bending concept
in mathematics. And it will make you love
mathematics, hopefully. Some people actually 
well, I won't go into the spiritual aspects of it. So what would be this, if I
just kept saying that I'm just going to keep taking
derivatives and adding them to this term, this polynomial? Well, the polynomial would
become p of x is equal to f of 0 plus f prime of 0 x. And let's just divide it by 1
factorial, just to make it clear that that's a
1 factorial, right? And that's an x
to the 1, right? That's just this term,
but I just wrote it a little differently. This term right here, this
is f of 0 times x to the 0. I know that's really
messy, but hopefully you see what I'm saying. And that's over 0
factorial, right? 0 factorial is 1, x to the 0
is 1, so it's just f of 0. And then plus the second
derivative at 0 times x squared over 2 factorial plus 
and we just keep adding. The third derivative at x is
equal to 0 of x to the third over 3 factorial, and
we just keep going on. So we could do
this to infinity. And actually we will do
it, and this is called the Maclaurin Series. So if we just wanted to
approximate this as hard as we can, essentially take the
infinite derivatives of it, we get the Maclaurin Series. So we are going to define
this polynomial p of x. It's going to be the infinite
series, the infinite sum. Let's start with n is equal
to 0, and we're going to go to infinity. What is each term? It's going to be f of  well
it's going to be f, the nth derivative of f evaluated at
0 times x to the n over n factorial. This is the Maclaurin Series. We're later learn that the
Maclaurin Series is a specific example of the Taylor Series,
which is a specific example of a power series. But anyway, this might seem
very complicated to you. I have all the sigma notation. Just remember, this is
essentially just that and I just keep going to infinity. And if you play around with
it it should make sense. But I think this will become a
lot more concrete when I do this with a specific f of x. This is where it gets cool. In case you don't think
it's already cool. So let's pick f of x to be,
to me, the most amazing function of them all. If I ever built a shrine or
a church or something or skyscraper, I would somehow
make this function show up all over the place, and then years
from now people would be awed by the mysticism of it all. But anyway, let's try to
approximate e to the x with a Maclaurin Series. You know that sigma thing,
that's hard to memorize. Just remember you want all the
derivatives to be the same. So let's make the
approximation of this. Actually, I won't prove it. It's out of the scope of
what we're doing right now. But the approximation, even
when it's centered at 0, actually equals the function
when you take the infinite sum. But let's just see
what it looks like. Because this is pretty cool. Before we start building the
polynomial, let's just figure out a couple of things. So what is f prime of x? That's also e to the x, right? What's f prime prime of x? Well that also
equals e to the x. We have learned and actually
recently did a proof that the derivative of e to
the x is e to the x. But that also needs a second
derivative and the third and the fourth and the nth
derivative of e to the x is equal to e to the x. I could take an arbitrary
number of derivatives of e to the x and it equals e to
the x, which is amazing. The rate of change of the
function at any point is equal to the function. The rate of change of the rate
of change of the function at any point is equal
to the function. I mean that's  I want to just
go some place and ponder it, but I'm too busy making videos. But anyway, back to
what we were doing. So what is f of 0? f of 0 is equal to e to the 0,
which is equal to 1, right? Well that's also going
to be f prime of 0. That's also e to the 0,
which is equal to 1. So all of the derivatives, the
nth derivative at 0 is going to equal 1 for this specific case
of f of x, for e to the x. And this is why
this is so cool. But actually, it actually
gets even more amazing. So, you hopefully realize
that f of 0 and all of its derivatives at
0 are equal to 1. So now we can do the powers
of the Maclaurin Series in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Approximating functions with polynomials (part 3)
I had dinner between the
last video and this one. So I might have forgotten
what I just did. I think I was about to if
what I see on my board makes sense I was about to use the
Taylor series, or in this specific example the Maclaurin
series approximation, to figure out a polynomial version, a sum
of polynomial terms to approximate e to the x. And remember let me write
here what the definition of the Maclaurin series was. That we said that f of x is
equal to the sum from n equals 0 to infinite of the nth
derivative of f evaluated at 0 I don't know if I
remembered to put it evaluated at 0 last time I wrote this
down times x to the n over n factorial. And hopefully that
makes sense to you. This might seem really
confusing and strange. But now that we're going to
apply it to e to the x, this should maybe be a little
bit more concrete. And I think at the end of the
last video I said that if f of x is e to the x, f of 0 is
e to the 0, which is 1. And f prime of x, any
derivative of e to the x is equal to e to the x. So you take any derivative of
at 0, and it equals 1 for e to the x for this particular
case of f of x. And that's really neat. That means that the rate of
change of y with respect to x is for every 1 you move in x,
you move 1 in y at e to the 0. But that also means that
the rate of change of the rate of change is also 1. At the rate of change at
the rate of change at the rate of change is also 1. So at either the 0 or x equals
0 of e to the x, the slope of the slope of the slope of the
slope of the slope of the slope of the slope, they're all 1. Which to me tells me something
mysterious is happening. It's another reason why you
should just sit and ponder e. But anyway, back to what
we were trying to do. So how would we do this? How would be write
the approximation? Let me write the approximate. I'll call that p of x. Because it's going
to be a polynomial. Well in this particular case,
what's the derivative of any derivative evaluated at f of 0? Well that term is 1. We wrote that down right here. f of 0 is 1. The first derivative at 0 is 1. The second derivative
at 0 is 1. Right? That's what's special
about e to the x. So all of these terms
are going to equal 1. So this polynomial simplifies
to the sum from n equals 0 to infinite of x to the
n over n factorial. That to me is very neat. Remember these are
all 1 in every term. So that's why I took it out. So what does that mean? Well that tells us that e to
the x can be approximated. And actually, I don't
prove it here. But it actually turns out that
we take the infinite sum that the Maclaurin series not only
approximates e to the x at x equals 0. When you take the infinite
series, it actually equals e to the x. So when you take a Maclaurin
series at 0, and the resulting function, the resulting
polynomial actually converges and that's something we'll
learn a little bit more rigorously hopefully later when
we start doing analysis but it can actually converge to the
function at all points. And it actually is the
case with e to the x. So we can actually say
that e to the x is equal. I didn't prove this. But you can take
my word for it. And you can even test it
out with some numbers. It equals this sum. Well what is this sum? It's x to the 0 over 0
factorial plus x to the 1 over 1 factorial plus x-squared
over 2 factorial. And you keep going. Of course that's equal. So e to x is equal
to x to the 0 is 1. 0 factorial, I said in
the last video is 1. So it's 1 plus this is just x,
plus x-squared over 2 factorial plus x to the third over
3 factorial plus x to the fourth over 4 factorial. And you just keep
going on forever. And that's e to the x. And to me that is amazing. Because this strange number e,
this 2.7 whatever, whatever, that we got from compound
interest, it can be written as an infinite polynomial, this
polynomial series or this Maclaurin series, that actually
has a certain beauty to it. This number is kind of ugly
when you write it out, 2.7 whatever, whatever. But when you write it to an
exponent power as an infinite sum, it kind of has
a nice rhythm to it. It's very patterned. Who would have guessed that
you could have written it in such a simple form. And even more, what happens
when x is equal to 1. Right? So what's e to the 1? Well then we set x equal
to 1 on both sides. And I think I have space to
do it here, e to the 1, which is equal to e. We just set all the x's to 1. So we get that's equal to 1
plus 1 plus 1 over 2 factorial plus 1 over 3 factorial plus 1
over 4 factorial plus 1 over 5 factorial. That to me, once
again, is amazing. That the number e, and we've
just stumbled on another definition of e, e is equal to
the sum from n equals 0 to infinite of 1 over n factorial. That is amazing. So now we have two
definitions for e. We have this one that we
stumbled on, and of course we had the ones from compound
interest that I will do in magenta. The limit as n approaches
infinite, 1 plus 1 over n to the n. That also is equal to e. This is starting to
give me chills. Because this very strange,
bizarre number is popping out. This might not seem
so natural to you. But it's neat. And it comes out in compound
interest, and continuously compounding interest. But this is even simpler. I just keep picking one over
the factorial of numbers and I add them all together. And if I take every number
really in existence, and I sum them all up, I get e. That to me is amazing. 1 over n factorial of
essentially every integer from 0 to infinite. If I sum them up, I
get the number e. You hopefully are getting
chills right now. Well anyway, let's do the
Maclaurin series for a couple more functions. And then we'll get to something
that is even more mind-blowing. I'll see you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 4)
We in the last video we took
the Macloren series of representation of e to the x. Now let's do it with a couple
of other functions and we'll see in a few videos it all fits
together like a giant puzzle. Let's do cosine of x. Let's set f of x, f of x
is equal to cosine of x. What's f prime of x? What's the first derivative
of cosine of x? Well that just equals
minus sine of x. Minus sine of x. What's the second derivative? Well that's just minus times
derivative of sine of x. So the derivative of sine
of x is cosine x, it's minus cosine of x. And what's the
third derivative? f 3 of x. The derivative of cosine x is
minus sine of x, we already have a minus here so it
becomes positive sine of x. What's f 4 of x? The fourth derivative of x? It equals cosine of x again. As we keep taking derivatives
we'll keep repeating and the pattern will go on, right? The fifth derivative of x, the
fifth derivative of this function, the fourth is the
same as a function, so the fifth is going to be the same
as the first derivative. cosine of x is sine of x. Hopefully you see the pattern. We're going to do the Macloren
representation, which is a specific example of the Taylor
series where we figure out the values of the derivatives
at x is equal to zero. So let's do that right now. So f of zero, let me do
it in to another color to fend off monotony. f of zero. What's cosine of zero? Cosine of zero is 1. f prime of zero is equal to
sine of well not minus sine of zero, but what sine of zero? Sine of zero is zero,
so minus zero is still zero, so this is zero. f prime prime of zero. Cosine of zero we
already know is one. We have a negative sine here,
so it becomes a minus one. The third derivative at
x is equal to zero. Sine of zero is zero. So this is zero. I think you might start to
see a pattern emerging. The fourth derivative at zero. Cosine of zero is equal to 1. And then the fifth derivative,
this is hard to read but you get the point is
just zero again. So what's the pattern as
we take the derivatives? 1, zero, minus 1,
zero, 1, zero. So it alternates
between zero and 1. So 1, zero, minus 1, zero,
positive, zero, negative, zero, positive. So every other number is zero
and in between them we alternate between a positive
1 and a negative 1. So now let's use that
information to figure out them the Macloren
series representation. So we proved, hopefully, we
didn't prove it definitely converges over the entire
domain of the function. You have to take
my word for it. We'll experiment a little bit
with a graphing calculator in a few videos. We said that this
representation and it should make intuitive sense, because
when you take the infinite Macloren series, when you take
that infinite sum, you're essentially creating a function
where that function is equal to your original function at
the point you chose. In the case of a Macloren we're
picking x equals zero, and it equals every derivative
of this function. Just intuitively it seems, well
if a function equals something at a point and every one of its
derivatives is also equal to the function at that point,
maybe those functions are equal to each other. I haven't proven
that to you yet. We know that the representation
is a sum from n is equal to zero to infinity of the nth
derivative evaluated at zero. A Macloren series is a specific
case of a Taylor series. We actually haven't done
anything with Taylor series, I was hoping to get there later. But the Macloren series is a
really cool one because it's going to show us all these
relationships between e and cosine and sine and eventually
i and pi and you will find it exciting. The Macloren is that times x
to the n over n factorial. That's what we said it was. So if this is our f of x, f
of x is cosine of x, what does this turn into? Well, f of x is equal to, it
equals f of zero times x to the zero over zero factorial,
that's just one, right? Plus, now we're at n equals 1. It's the first
derivative at zero. f prime of zero, well
that's just equal to zero. And who cares what that
that would be x to the first over 1, right? Now we're at the
second derivative. The second derivative
at zero is minus 1. Minus 1 times x squared
over 2 factorial plus the third derivative at zero. The third derivative at zero
we figured out was zero. Zero who cares what that is. It would have been x to the
third over 3 factorial. And then what's the
fourth derivative? The fourth derivative at
zero is just equal to 1. So we have times 1 and then
we're at x to the fourth over 4 factorial. Let me see if I can write
this a little bit neater. The next one, the fifth
derivative at zero times x to the fifth over 5 factorial. We'll keep going. Let me write this, clean this
up and hopefully the pattern merges if it hasn't
emerged already. f of x is equal to cosine of x
is equal to let met get rid of the zeros 1 and then we
have minus x squared over 2 factorial. This term, this goes away. This is a zero term. And the next one is a positive. Plus x to the fourth
over 4 factorial. And the fifth term goes away. But then the cycle continues. The next one is
going to be minus. Because we had minus 1 plus 1. It's going to be minus x to
the sixth over 6 factorial. You could take the
sixth derivative. You'll see that the derivative
of minus sine of x is minus cosine of x, that's where
we get the minus 1 from. And they we're
going to go plus. So we're just taking all the
even terms. x to the eighth over 8 factorial minus x to
the 10th over 10 factorial. We could just keep going
on and on and on. And so we have a situation
where we can rewrite cosine of x is equal to the sum, if you
believe that this Macloren series actually does converge
to cosine of x over the entire domain of x, that's kind of
an assumption we're making. Hopefully one day we will have
the tools set to actually prove that as well. From n is equal to zero. So what's happening? We're taking all of
the even powers. So we could say x to the 2n,
that ensures that no matter what value of n I put in
here I get an even numbers. So we'll go to the zeroth
power then the second power, over 2n factorial. So that takes care of going
from 1 to x squared over 2, to x to the fourth over
4 factorial, 6 over 6 factorial, et cetera. But now we have to make it
switched signs like that. Well let's just multiply
it negative 1. Let's see what we can do. Negative 1 to the so we want
the first term to be positive, the second term to be negative. So we could say times
minus 1 to the n plus 1. Let's see if that works. When m is zero what's
negative 1 to the n plus 1? zero, it would be minus 1. And then when it's 1 When
it's zero no, no it's just going to be negative
1 to the n. Because when it's zero,
negative 1 to zero is 1. When it's 1, negative 1. So this will work out. Negative 1 to the n is cosine. You could try it out. This is the n is equal to zero. We need to switch colors. That's n is equal to zero and
here we get x to the zero over zero factorial, which is 1. We have negative 1 to the zero
is 1, so that becomes 1. When n is equal to 1, this
becomes x squared over 2 factorial, we have negative 1
to the 1 power, so that's where you get the negative 1. And then when n is equal to
2, the negative 1 squared becomes positive again. So the negative 1 is
what provides the alternating numbers. So pretty neat. We just figured out another
way to represent cosine of x. And it might be looking a
little bit interesting to you that this representation kind
of resembles part of the representation of e to the x. What's the difference between
this and the e to the x? e to the x had the odd exponent
terms and it didn't switch signs. But other than that, they're
pretty much the same. So in the next video we'll
do sine of x and then we'll try to put it all together. I'll see you soon. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximations of functions (part 5)
Welcome back. Well, in the last video we
took the Maclaurin series for cosine of x, the Maclaurin
series representation. So I guess we might as well
do the same for sine of x. And I'm sounding very
nonchalant, but I have a reason behind why I'm doing this, and
you'll see in a few videos from now, when we come up with
the grand conclusion. So anyway, let's
just set up f of x. And you might just want to do
this yourself instead of watching me do it, because it
should be pretty self-explanatory now that you
saw cosine of x. And then you could
check your work. You can pause right now, and
then you can check to see that we got the same answer. You'll probably be right
and I probably made a careless mistake. So f of x is equal
to sine of x. First of all, let's just
figure out all of the derivatives of sine of x. We can already guess that it
probably cycles similar to cosine of x, with
slight variation. So what's the derivative
of sine of x? Well, that's just cosine of x. What's the second derivative? I'm just going to stop
putting parentheses around these numbers. The second derivative, well,
that's just derivative of that. It's minus sine of x. The third derivative of x. Well, I guess I'll put the
parentheses so you don't think it's f to the third times x. The third derivative, well,
that's just going to be the minus cosine, rightu0008? Because the derivative of sine
is cosine, but then we have that minus sine there. And the fourth derivative. The derivative of cosine is
minus sine, but we have a minus there, so we get back to sine. And then the cycle continues. So the fifth derivative is just
going to be cosine of x, or just the derivative
of the sine of x. And then the cycle
continues, right? All right. So we know the derivatives,
and we can just keep going. So let's evaluate the
derivatives of our function of sine of x at x equals 0. f of 0. Well, that's sine of zero. What's sine of 0? Well, sine of 0 is 0. f prime of 0 is equal
to cosine of 0. That's equal to 1. The second derivative at 0,
that's minus sine of 0. Well, sine of 0 is still 0. So that's 0. You can see it's a very similar
pattern to what we saw in the Maclaurin series
for cosine of x. And then the third
derivative evaluated at 0. That's cosine of 0 is 1. But we have a minus sine,
so that's minus 1. This you already know. The fourth derivative is 0. Sine of 0 is 0. And then it starts
to cycle again. The fifth derivative,
0 equal to 1. So we start with 0, then
positive 1, then 0, then minus 1, then 0, then positive 1. Every other number is a 0. Every other, I guess you could
say, coefficient in the Maclaurin series is a 0. The coefficient when you don't
include the factorial term. And then the ones in between
oscillate between positive 1 and negative 1. So what would be the Maclaurin
series for sine of x? The Maclaurin series
representation? So we could say that sine of x
 And remember, I haven't proven to you that the
Maclaurin series representation of sine of x or cosine of x or
e to the x really is equal to those functions over
the entire domain. I might do that later. Frankly, I've been thinking
about the proof myself. It hasn't been completely
intuitive how to do that proof. Although if you test them
out, it does seem to make a lot of sense. But you shouldn't just
take my word for it. I'm going to look up the
proof and I will prove it to you, eventually. But for now, you just have to
take it as a bit of a leap of faith that the Maclaurin series
representations just don't approximate those functions
around 0, that when you take the infinite series, it
actually equals the function. So sine of x. The Maclaurin series
representation is going to be equal to  well, f of 0,
that's 0 plus f of  so the first derivative, it's going to
be 1 times x to the 1 over 1 factorial, which is just 1. This is just 1. And then we have  this is
just plus 0  and then we have minus  and now this is the
third derivative  so, minus 1 times x to the third
over 3 factorial. And then you have a 0. Then we have a plus 1. And this is now the fifth
derivative, so x to the fifth over five factorial. And we'll just keep going, but
I think you see the pattern as we write and rewrite it. Sine of x is equal to 0, so we
get x to the first, so that's just x minus x to the third
over 3 factorial plus x to the fifth over 5 factorial. And then you can
imagine the pattern. We'd go minus  we're just
taking the odd numbers  x to the seventh over 7 factorial
plus x to the ninth over 9 factorial minus x to the
eleventh over 11 factorial, and we'll just keep going. And so we'll just keep
oscillating in sine  that's a bit of a pun  and we use
all of the odd exponents. So if I were to write that in
sigma notation, and sigma notation often is
the hard part. Well once again, the first
term, when the term is 0  this is the first term, right
 we get a positive sine. Because we're going to
oscillate in sine, we're probably going to take
negative 1 to some power. It'll be negative 1
to the n plus 1. So let's see if that works. If this is the first term,
this will be a  no, no, no, that won't work. It'll be to the 2n plus 1. Actually, I think I should
have done that in the previous video, too. I think it should have been
negative 1 to the 2n, not negative 1 to the n. I'm sorry for that mistake. So it's negative 1 to the 2n
plus 1 times x to the 2n. Oh, no, no, sorry, I was
right in the previous video. See, I'm confusing
myself, because I don't count the 0 terms. It would probably help me to
write the sigma down first. So this is equal to  as you
can see I do all of this in real time  infinity
from n is equal to 0. And so, the first term is
positive, so it'll be negative 1 to the n, right? Because negative 1 to the
0 power is 1, right? So that's positive and then the
second term is negative, then positive, negative, right? And so, the zeroth term is x,
so it has to be x to the  let me see  2n plus 1. Does that work? Right, because the first
term would then be 3. Right. x to the 2n plus 1
over 2n plus 1 factorial. It's almost easier when you
just write it out like that. Well, that's pretty
interesting. But what's even more
interesting is if you see the similarity between the
Maclaurin series representation for sine of x, and then the
representation we figured out for cosine of x in
the previous video. We figured out that cosine of x
is equal to 1 minus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to the
fourth over 4 factorial minus x to the sixth over six factorial
plus x to the eighth over 8 factorial. So they're almost the
opposite, right? They almost complement
each other. The cosine, these are all of
the even exponents, right? And even factorials. And sine is all of the odd
exponents, because this is x to the 0, right? So that's why you get 1 here. And in sine, it's all of the
odd exponents and all of the odd factorials in
the denominator. So that by itself, I
think, is pretty neat. What is especially neat, just
another fodder for thought, is that we know from trigonometry
that sine is just a shifted cosine function or that cosine
is just a shifted sine function. But what's neat is by shifting
it by pi over 2  which is all they are, right, if you were to
graph it, they're just shifted 90 degrees to the left or the
right of each other  you can actually represent them
differently by essentially picking the odd or even terms
of this factorial polynomial series, whatever you
want to call it. But anyway. Doesn't matter if you didn't
understand what I said at the end, as long as you
appreciate how cool this is. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 6)
Well let's review a little
bit everything that we've covered so far. So what was the Maclaurin
Series representation of e to the x? And once again, you'll have to
take my word for it, that the Maclaurin Series representation
really does equal, when you take the infinite series, it
really does equal e to the x. I mentioned in a previous
video that I was thinking about the proof. And I finally gave up because I
couldn't think of the proof. And then I looked it up and I
realized why I couldn't think of the proof, it's
quite involved. But I will do it eventually. Probably after I cover a lot of
other things just because it's not something that you really
have to know to succeed well in calculus, or appreciate
what we're about to do. But I will do it. It'll probably take
five or six minutes. Anyway back to where we were. So the Maclaurin Series
repetition of e to the x, and it actually does equal e to the
x, is 1 plus x, plus x squared over 2 factorial, plus x to the
third over 3 factorial. I'm going to do a bunch of
terms and you'll see why. And x to the fourth over 4
factorial, plus x to the fifth, over 5 factorial, plus x to the
sixth, over 6 factorial, plus x to the seventh over 7
factorial, plus x to the eighth over 8 factorial. And it just keeps going on
and on to infinity, right? Only when we take the infinite
series does it exactly equal e to the x. Fair enough. Well what was the Maclaurin
Series representation of cosine of x? Well that equaled  and I'm
going to space them out in a certain way, and I think you'll
see why  it equalled 1 plus x squared over  oh no, sorry, 1
minus, this is a minus sign, let me erase that because I
want to make this as neat as possible. Equal to 1 minus x squared over
2 factorial, right, we learned that two videos ago, plus x
to the fourth over for 4 factorial, minus x to the
sixth over 6 factorial. I think you might already know
know where I'm going with this. Plus x to the eighth over 8
factorial, and it just kept going, the next digit would
be a minus out here. And it goes to infinity, right? For that pattern, you
know the pattern. And what is sine of x? What's the Maclaurin Series
representation for sine of x? Well, sine of x, it equals x
minus x to the third over 3 factorial, plus x to the fifth
over 5 factorial, minus x to the seventh over 7 factorial,
and it just keeps going. You'd have an x to
the ninth out here. But it goes on for
infinity, right? These all go on for infinity,
but you know the pattern. So let's just pause here
because this is, I think if you understand what's going on, one
of the few things in life that will truly give you chills. It'll truly make you believe
that there is a order to the universe that we as
human beings can only catch a glimpse of. We have limited minds. But we are on the verge, we're
scraping the surface, but there's something amazing here. Cosine of x and sine of x. Each of their Maclaurin Series
representations, or if you were essentially to write them as
polynomials, each of them looks like it's almost like part
of e to the x, right? It's almost every other digit. And they would be the
same except for a couple of sign changes. Let me make that clear. So what if I were to define
the function cosine of x plus sine of x? What would that equal? Or what would it's Maclaurin
Series representation of that be? Well, and then we know
that it's also equal. But it's essentially
adding these two rows. So it would be 1 plus x, minus
squared over 2 factorial, minus x to the third over 3
factorial, plus x to the fourth over 4 factorial, plus x to the
fifth over 5 factorial, minus x to the sixth over 6 factorial,
minus x to the seventh over 7 factorial, plus x to the
eight over 8 factorial. And it just keeps going, right? The next one would be a plus,
it goes on to infinity. Now I think it should be clear
to you that something, that the goose bumps should be
emerging on your arm. Because look at this,
and look at e to the x. What's the difference? Well, just a couple of negative
signs here and there. Let me do it in a
slightly brighter color. So the only difference between
this function and this function are these negative signs. And I've seen this before, I've
learned this before, people for hundreds of years
have known this. But I'll tell you something. No one, even though they can
prove it mathematically, no one really understands why this is. Why we take these trigonometric
functions that appear, you know, when we take the ratios
of the sides of a right triangle, or the unit circle
definition, and you know it's useful for, you know, triangle
measure, that's trigonometry. That's where we came up with
this cosine and sine functions. And it's related to the
circle and all the rest. That when you add these two
fundamental functions together from trigonometry, right? Because tangent is really
just the ratio of the sine to cosine. So these are really what
trigonometry, this is the basis of trigonometry. When you add their polynomial
representations together, it's almost exactly, except for
these negative signs, the polynomial representation
of e to the x. And the number e, and first
of all, this is an exponent, these are no exponents here. And e is just completely
unrelated, or at least one would think from trigonometry. Right, e is, we got e from
compound interest, you'll see that it's related to
exponential growth, exponential decay, when you have continuous
exponential growth and decay, continuous compound interest. If this number that is in a
completely unrelated field of, not just mathematics, but
really the universe, right? Continuous interest vs.
the ratios of the sides of right triangles. So this should already be
getting you thinking. But what would be even more
amazing is if we could somehow work with these to make them
a little bit more equal. Well, the only thing that's
different are these negative signs, right? So do we know anything else
in mathematics, in our mathematical tool kit,
that has this pattern? Where it goes positive
positive, negative negative, positive positive,
negative negative? It has this essentially
the cycle of four. Well you might be thinking, and
this will even give you larger goose bumps, or make your
current ones bigger, the number i, or the imaginary unit i. So what are the powers of i? This is a little review. If this is completely
unfamiliar to you, you should re-watch the imaginary
numbers video. So what are the powers of i? Well i to the zero is 1, i to
the first is i, i squared is negative 1, i to the third
power, that's negative 1 times i, so it's negative i. i to the fourth power is i
times negative i, so the i's become negative 1 and
then you have a negative there, so it becomes 1. And the pattern repeats itself.
i to the fifth is i, i to the sixth is negative 1. We learned this before,
but it's just a review. i to the seventh is negative
i, i to the eighth then becomes 1 again. So there you have it,
this is amazing. i has that property where the
second two in the cycle of four are negative, right? We have a negative number here. This is not necessarily a
negative number, it's a negative imaginary number, but
we have that negative sign, so it looks pretty similar, right? Then we have two positives,
then we have a negative and a negative. And something else is
interesting going on here. Wherever we see the imaginary
number, whenever we see an i or a negative i, which terms
do they correspond to? Well they correspond to the
terms of sine of x, right? It corresponds to that term,
negative i corresponds to that term. i corresponds to that term,
negative i corresponds to that term. So we have something, it
seems a little bit even more of a pattern. But anyway, I just realized I
only have  I have to say I'm normally pretty smooth in these
videos, but when I start talking about what I'm talking
about right now, my brain starts to go in circles. Because this is, I've actually
even heard, you know, what we're what we're about to touch
on, as proof of the existence of God. And really, that's not that
much of an exaggeration. It is definitely proof of the
existence of some hidden order of the universe that we can
only catch a glimpse of. And maybe you can
call that God. But anyway, I don't want to get
metaphysical on you, but I will see you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Polynomial approximation of functions (part 7)
Welcome back. So let's continue
where we left off. So we had this intuition that i
must have something to do with these sign changes, right? The pattern of the sign changes
of i are very similar to the pattern of the sign changes in
the Maclaurin representation of cosine of x plus sine of x. And then we also saw that the
i's, whether they're positive i's or negative i's,
correspond to the sine terms. So let's do a
little experiment. And it's not an experiment
because I know where this leads to, but it could
have been an experiment. What is e to the i x? Well, raising anything to the
i power really isn't defined. I mean, i, itself, was
created by a definition. We said, "i squared is equal to
negative 1 by definition." So i is a bit of a definition. So if we haven't defined what
something to the i power is yet, we really don't know
what to do with it. But let's just say that
we can treat i just like any other number. And we do know what happens
with i when you put it into a polynomial. That's one thing we do know. In fact, that's one of the
reasons why i was defined in first place was so that people
could take roots of all polynomials, even ones that
didn't have real roots. So what happens if we
take e to the i x? Well, I don't know what that is
but we know we could put that into the Maclaurin
representation of e to the x and actually, since you're
taking my leap of faith, that that is equal to e of x and all
of its derivatives are equal to e to the x's derivatives at x
equals 0, it's not that hard to imagine. And actually, you could plot
the graph of this and you'll see that they're identical. So if we take the Maclaurin
representation of this, everywhere we see an x we just
replace it with an i x, right? So that will be 1 plus i x plus
 let me just write it  plus i squared x squared
over 2 factorial. Oops. i squared x squared plus
i to the third x to the third over 3 factorial plus i to the
fourth x to the fourth over 4 factorial plus i to the fifth x
to the fifth over 5 factorial. I don't have to keep going. Plus, and it just
keeps going, right? So what happens when
you simplify that? So that equals 1 plus i
x  What's i squared? That's negative 1, right?
 minus x squared over 2 factorial. What's i to the third? That's minus i. So it's minus i x to the
third over 3 factorial plus i to the fourth. So what's i to the fourth? That's just 1 again. So we get plus x to the
fourth over 4 factorial. And then we have 
what's i to the fifth? Plus i times x to the
fifth over 5 factorial. It just keeps going. We have something
interesting here. Now, all of a sudden, we have
something extremely similar to this except for only
one difference. Compare that to e to the i x. The dots on my i's
always get merged. Compare these 2 things
that I'm circling. What's the difference? Let's see the 1, 1. Well, here, I have an
x, I have an i x here. Then minus x squared
over 2 fact  so these terms are the same. Then on the x to the third, the
signs are right but have an i. And then, x to the fourth over
4 factorial  that's identical  but then on x to the
fifth, I have an i. So the only difference between
this and this is on the terms that involve sin of x, right? So what are the terms
that involve sin of x? This term corresponds
to that term, right? This term corresponds
to that term. These are the terms that
correspond to sin of x in this representation. That term corresponds
to that term. And the only difference is 
so this has all of the terms that the sin of x would have
but they all have an i in front of them, right? Even the sign is right. This is negative,
that's negative. But this just has an
i in front of it. So it turns out, that you
could rewrite this, right? You could rewrite
this representation. Well, it doesn't turn out. It's pretty obvious
you could rewrite it. Let me clear this
just so we get a  So we could actually
rewrite that e to the i x. And we could write it  we
could separate out the imaginary terms and we could
separate out the real terms. What were the real terms? Well, the real terms were 1
minus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to the fourth
over 4 factorial minus x to the sixth over 6 factorial. And it just kept going
to infinity, right? Those were the real terms. That's to infinity dot dot dot. This pen tool looks
like minus signs. I don't want to do that. Oh, I can't undo it. So this is just dot dot dot. So those are the real
terms, essentially. And then, the imaginary terms
 it was plus  well, all of these terms are going to
have i on them, right? So let me just take the i out. So, plus i times  and we
figured out that those terms were x minus  well, I don't
want to give it away too fast  x to the third
over 3 factorial. Plus x to the fifth over 5
factorial minus x to the seventh over 7 factorial and
it just kept going on, on, and on to infinity, right? Well isn't this the Maclaurin
representation of cosine of x? And similarly, isn't this the
Maclaurin representation of sin of x? Well yeah, sure. And you probably realized it in
the previous screen where I showed that all of the
imaginary terms corresponded to the sin of x terms. And all the real ones,
likewise, were the cosine of x when we we compared it to sin
of x plus cosine of x. So if you believe me, that the
Maclaurin representation of e to the x is equal to e to the x
and the Maclaurin representation of cosine and
sin of x are equal to those functions, then all of a
sudden, we come up with this bizarre and amazing and
mystical idea that e to the i x is equal to cosin of x plus i
times the sin of x. And this is called
Euler's formula. And actually e
stands for Euler. That's where it comes from. Euler starts with an E. E U L E R. But this is amazing. Not only have we found a
relationship between this bizarre, mystical, magical
number, e, and these trigonometric functions that we
defined as a ratio of the sides of right triangles, but now
we're involving this other mystical, magical number that
we invented just so that all of our polynomials would have some
root, whether or not they're real or not. We have this number, i, all
of a sudden showing up. This by itself is amazing. But now we can take it one
step further and this should blow your mind. If it doesn't, then
you have no emotion. I will just judge you. So if we take this and,
essentially, we're taking it that when you take something to
the i power, that you can just substitute it into this
Maclaurin repres  but I won't go into the details. But I think you can say
that this is a pretty reasonable proposition. But what happens if we take
something to the pi power? If e to the i pi power? Before, we didn't have any
way of saying, "Well, what does that mean? Taking something to the i pi
power?" But now we do because we're saying that these
2 sides of this are equal to each other. So what happens? Let me do this in a bold color
because it deserves to be bold. e to the i pi is equal to well,
where x is pi, is equal to cosine of pi plus i sin of pi. Well what's cosine of pi? This is equal to negative 1. And sin of pi, well
that's just equal to 0. We get e to the i pi is
equal to negative 1. This is amazing. Or you could also write e to
the i pi plus 1 is equal to 0. Once again, amazing. Either of these should make you
question your take on reality because we have the number pi,
which is a ratio of a circumference of a
circle to its diameter. We have the number, e, that
comes from a continuous compound interest. And then we have the number, i,
which you can say the square root of negative 1 or it
squared is negative 1. And they all come together. This formula right here
involves all the fundamental numbers in mathematics but
they come from completely different directions. Completely different
directions. And although we can prove this
and we can say this is true, I'll tell you no one  no one
 probably in the history of mankind, fully
understands why this is. This is just a glimpse on some
type of order in the universe. 

Transcript for: Taylor Polynomials
Welcome to the video on
the Taylor Theorem and Taylor polynomials. And we've actually
already touched on this. When we did the videos on
approximating functions with polynomials, we used Maclaurin
series, which is actually a special case of the Taylor
polynomial or the Taylor Theorem. And we just pick, we
approximate the function around x equals 0 when we
did the Maclaurin series. But in general, you could
approximate a function around any value. And if you do it around
something other than 0, it's kind of the more general
case, and we're dealing with the Taylor polynomial. So what is that? Let me just write the
definition down, and then we'll do a couple of examples, and
then we'll graph it to get the intuition. So a Taylor polynomial says
that if I have a differentiable function f of x, and I want
to approximate it with a polynomial at c, so at some
value of x equals c, I want to approximate this function. So let me just draw a quick and
dirty one, and we'll actually draw an accurate one later. So let's say that that's
my axes, this is my function f of x. So I could pick some value
c, some value x is equal to c, maybe it's right there. So that's c. And I would want to approximate
it, I would want to create a polynomial that can approximate
the function around this point. And the Taylor Theorem tells us
that the Taylor polynomial to approximate this is, and then
I'll give you the intuition for it in a second. p of x. And this looks really
complicated, but when you do some examples, you'll
see it's not so bad. p of x is equal to f of c plus
f prime of c times x minus c plus f prime prime of c over,
they say 2 factorial, which is just 2, but OK, I'll
write 2 factorial. They do that so that you see
the pattern that emerges. This is over 1 factorial,
really, and this is over 0 factorial, really. Times x minus c squared plus,
I'm already running out of space, f the third derivative,
I think at this point people just write a 3 in parentheses,
of the function evaluated at c over 3 factorial times x minus
c to the third, and you could just keep adding terms. You could go on like
this for infinity. But let me give you the
intuition of what this is. Let me just show you, just
to hit the point home. Then you could plus the fourth
derivative of the function evaluated at c times over 4
factorial times x minus c to the fourth. Now what's the intuition? So first of all, what happens
to this polynomial at c? So what's p of c? p of c is equal to if p of c,
everywhere where you see an x here, you have to
put a c, right? So this term would be c minus
c, so that would go to zero, or it would be 0. This term would be c
minus c, it would be 0. This term would be c minus
c, so it would be 0. This term would
be c minus c, 0. And all you'd be left
with is this f of c. So great. We already know that, at least
at the value of c, the polynomial is equal
to the function. So it's going to
intersect this line. Right? And actually, if we just had a
Taylor polynomial with just that first term, what
would it look like? Well, it would just be a
horizontal line right there. So it would be a pretty
bad approximation. But, what does this
second term do us? Because we know that if
we just evaluated c. All these other terms
just drop out. So what do they do for us? Well, the second term actually
ensures that the derivative of this polynomial, evaluated at
c, is equal to the derivative of this function,
evaluated at c. What do I mean there? Well, what's p prime of x? p prime of x is equal to, well,
this is just a constant term. It might look like a function,
but it's a function evaluated at c, so it's just
a constant term. And so, that's 0. And then, what is this? What's the derivative of this? Well, we could use, this is
a constant term, and the derivative of this is just 1. So you could almost just view
this as f prime of c times x, minus f prime of c times c
which is a constant, whatever. So the derivative of this
expression is f of c, and then plus the derivative of this
expression, and that's equal to what? 2 times 2 divided by 2
factorial, which is just 1. So it's f prime prime of
c, times x minus c, and then plus, let's see. 3 over 3 factorial, so that's
3 over 6, we'll just have a 2 in the denominator. f prime prime prime of
c over, what was it, 2 times x minus c squared And you don't have to
worry about all of this. And then, we could
just keep going. But I wanted just to
show you one thing. What is t prime at c? t prime at c. What is the derivative
of this polynomial when you evaluate it at c? Well, when you put c into this
derivative function, all these other terms are going to drop
off, and you're just left with this one. Right? Because this x minus c
sorry, just had some walnuts. I should have some
water with it. If you put the c
here, they drop out. So the derivative of this
function evaluated at c, is equal to f prime of c. So as you can see, what's neat
about this Taylor polynomial is, it's equal to the function
at c, its derivative is equal to the function at c, the
second derivative is equal to the function at c. And every term you add to the
Taylor polynomial actually makes it so that that term,
derivative, of the polynomial evaluated at c, is
equal to the function. Hope I didn't confuse you. The big picture is, the whole
thinking behind, I guess, what Taylor thought of, was, wow. If this function is infinitely
differentiable, meaning that I can take the first, second,
third, fourth, you know, all the way to infinity derivative
of this function, I could construct a polynomial like
this, and i can just keep going by adding more and more terms,
so that this polynomial's, you know, zeroth derivative, which
is means the function, the 0, first, second, third, fourth,
all of this polynomial's derivatives are going to
be equal to the function. At least around that point. And actually, we'll see that
there's actually a whole class of functions, that the Taylor
polynomial, if you were to take the infinite series, is
actually equal to that function at all points. But anyway. And actually, I talk a little
bit about that when I prove that e to the i pi is equal to
negative 1, which to me was the most amazing result
in mathematics. Whatever, whatever. This might have been a little
confusing for you, so let's do a particular example. The particulars are
always the more fun. I think when you see me do
an example, you'll see that it's not so bad. I'm even going to erase
this fourth term. So let's approximate, I
don't know, cosine of x. So let's say that f of x
is equal to, let me do it in a different color. We want to approximate f of x
is equal to cosine of access. And let's pick some
arbitrary number. Let's not pick some number
that works well with trigonometric functions. Let's pick around, let's
say c is equal to 2. No, 1. So we're going to approximate
cosine of x around 1. So what is the Taylor
approximation, or the Taylor polynomial? Well, we could just
chug through this one. p of x, I'll do it in yellow. p of x is equal to f of c. So the function evaluated at c
is just cosine of 1, right? plus s prime of c. Well, what is the
derivative of cosine of x? It's minus sine of x, right? Minus sine of x, and we
want to evaluate it at c. So it's minus sine of 1,
right? c is one, that's we're approximating around. Times x minus c. And then, plus the
second derivative of x. So what's the
second derivative? What's going to be the
derivative of minus sine, which is minus cosine of x? So it's minus cosine. But we're evaluating it at c,
so there's actually going to be a number, right? So c is 1. Cosine of 1. Over 2, right? 2 factorial is just 2. Times x minus 1 squared,
oh, sorry, this should be a one, right? I said, c is equal to 1. Times x minus 1 squared. Let's keep going. Plus the third derivative,
plus, what's the third derivative of cosine? Well, it's the derivative
of minus cosine, so that's plus sign. So plus sine evaluated at 1. Sine of 1. Divided by 3 factorial,
so that's 6 over 6 times x minus 3 to third. Sorry, my brain is really,
I ate too many walnuts. Undo, edit, undo. x minus
1 to the third, right? And then, let's do one
more term, just for fun. So then we're going to take the
fourth derivative, which is the derivative of the third
derivative, so the third derivative was positive sine,
so now we're going to be plus cosine. Plus cosine evaluated at
1 over 4 factorial what's 4 factorial? It's 3 factorial times 4. So over 24. Times x minus 1 to the fourth. And we could just keep going. The fifth derivative over 5
evaluated at 1, over 5 factorial times x minus 1 to
the fifth, and just keep adding, but then it will
take us forever, et cetera, et cetera. So, what does this
thing look like? And what I'm going to do, is
I'm going to show you how this polynomial develops
as we add terms. So let's see. I have this graphing calculator
that I so this thing I got from, just to give them
credit, it's my.hrw.com. And this is the graph
of cosine of x. So just the first term here. Cosine of 1. If we were to just to graph the
first term of this polynomial, what does it look like? So I'll just type in cosine
of 1, and graph it. So there you go. Just the first term
of the polynomial. If all of these terms weren't
here, the polynomial would just be a constant, right? Cosine of one. And it's a pretty bad
approximation, but at least it equals the function
at this point. So it gives a something. But let's add some terms. Let's add the
second term to it. So what was the second term? It was sine of 1 minus sine
of 1 times x minus 1. Let me add that. Graph it. There you go. So this is neat. So when you just added 2
terms, what did we say? The polynomial will be equal to
the function at x equals 1. And now the slope is also
equal to the function. The slope of the polynomial is
also equal to the slope of the function at x is equal to 1. So this is a better
approximation. At least if we stay pretty
close to our chosen c, it's a decent approximation
for the function. Obviously, if we get far away,
out here, this is a horrible approximation for the function. But let's keep adding terms. As you can see, I just want
to show you that I'm just typing in the actual terms. So let me type in
the next term. just so you believe
that I'm doing it. So the next term,
we'll have to see it. Let me type it in. So the next term is minus
cosine of 1 divided by 2 times x minus 1 squared. And let me graph it. OK. So now, just to show you, I
just typed in the second term, and now let's
look at the graph. Now this is neat, right? So the first term got us a
horizontal line that just intersected the point at cosine
of 1, and it was a really bad approximation. Then the second term made sure
that at least the first derivative was the same. And so then we, the line was
just essentially the tangent line, we only had 2 terms. Now the third term makes sure
that the second derivative of our polynomial at x equals 1 is
equal to the second derivative of the polynomial
of the function. And notice that this
green graph is concave downwards, right? Which means that, and so
is the function at 1. So this is this is pretty neat. We're getting a little bit, so
it's kind of approximating the curve here. It's getting a
little bit better. Remember when we went
out far to the left? Starting to approximate the
function better around here. It's closer, at least. Right? The last time, the line just
went up, and here it was a really bad approximation. But let's add another term. Let's add our third term. Our third term, I can see
it, it's right there. So plus sine of 1 divided
by 6 times x minus 1 to the third power. Just to show you, I just
typed it in, right there. Let me graph it. That is neat. Just with three terms on our
polynomial, well, actually, that's the fourth
term, officially. But the first term was
essentially well, you get the point. But we're already starting
to approximate this pretty well, right? Now the third derivative of the
polynomial is equal to the third derivative of the
function at the point x is equal to 1, and we haven't even
studied third derivatives. That's kind of like the
concativity of the derivative, or whatever. But as we can see,
it approximates the function even better. Obviously, though, when we
go further away, it starts to break down again. But pretty close. If all you saw is from
here to here, it would be hard to tell them apart. Let's add that last
term we calculated. And this should be pretty neat. Let's see. The last term. Plus cosine sign of
1 divided by 24. And notice, every term, the
scaling factor, right? Here's 1, then 1/2, then
1/6, 1/24 it becomes a smaller impact on it. And it only starts to matter as
you move really, really far away from your chosen c. In this case 1, right. The further out you go,
when you're close to your point that you've picked. these other terms don't
matter much, right? Because you're doing 1/24,
and then 1 over 5 factorial, et cetera et cetera. But as you get further and
further away, these terms become more significant, right? As x gets further and further
away from 1, and then that's where these start to play in,
and you see that in the approximation. Anyway, let me graph it. So cosine of 1 divided by 24
times x minus 1 to the fourth. Let me graph it. Even neater! And if you have some spare
time, you might just want to keep adding terms to this. So that's all the
Taylor polynomial is. And I realize, this is
probably one of longest videos I've done. I'm pushing 17 minutes. It's a little confusing at
first, because it gives you this huge formula, and they
give you the c, and you're like, what is that c, and how
do I take the derivative? But when you actually try to
chug through it, you just have to realize, oh. All this is, is saying, we are
constructing a polynomial that, at some point c that we've
picked, this polynomial's zeroth, first, second, third,
fourth, fifth, and so on-th derivative is going to be
equal to our function. And actually, if we did 10
terms, or if we did all of the derivatives, these would start
to actually equal each other. So hopefully that
didn't confuse you. I know when you see the formula
at first, it can be kind of daunting, and especially,
sometimes it's even more daunting when someone
even explains it to you. But hopefully that gave
you some intuition. If it didn't,
ignore this video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Exponential Growth
Let's do a problem on
exponential growth. And if you think about it, what
we're going to do here with a bacteria, it's no different
than what we did with compound interest when we learned about
interest and the number e. Because if you think about it
well, I'll draw the analogy as we do this problem. Anyway, this is a compound
growth problem, or an exponential growth problem. And it says: a bacteria culture
initially contains 100 cells and grows at a rate
proportional to its size. After an hour, the population
has increased to 420. So this first says find an
expression for the number of bacteria after t hours. So in general, anything that
When you're dealing with exponential growth or
exponential decay. Or continuously compounding
growth or continuously compounding decay, though
you'll very seldom hear that term. The amount of whatever you have
as a function of time will be this type of equation. I'll say bacteria as
a function of time. So I'll say b of t. And I'll do it here. So b of Well, let me
do it here. b of t. Bacteria as a function of time
is going to be equal to the initial bacteria, or the
initial of whatever we have for doing compound interest is
the amount we start with, e to the kt. Where k is kind of our
compounding rate. And so in general, if you
have this I naught, the initial amount you have. And that makes sense, right? Because if t equals 0, this
whole expression is 1. So b of 0 should
just be I naught. So if you know what you start
with, and then you have another point, you can solve for k. And then you have
an expression. You have the first
thing they want. Find an expression for the
number bacteria after t hours. So my question to you is, first
of all, what is I sub zero? What is your initial number
of bacterial cells? Well they tell us. They tell us right here. The bacteria culture initially
contains 100 cells. So we know that b of 0 when
time equals 0 or 0 hours, that is equal to 100 where the
unit is cells, right? And so, if we substitute
here t equals 0, this is 1. So we know that I naught
is equal to 100. Let me do that actually. So b of 0 is also equal if we
look at it there I naught times e to the what? k times 0
times e to the zero is equal to I naught. So this tells us that the
bacteria at time 0 is 100. And then when we substitute
here, is that the bacteria times 0 is equal to I naught. So I naught must equal 100. OK. So we're making some progress. So we know that the bacteria
as a function of time is equal to I naught, 100,
times e to the kt. Now, if we just knew k, then we
would have done this part A, find an expression for the
number bacteria after t hours. Well how can we figure out k? Well they give us
another data point. After an hour, the population
has increased to 420. So that tells us Let me [SIDE COMMENTS] Anyway, so what was I doing? Oh. So this tells us, after
an hour the population has increased to 420. So that tells us
that b of 1, right? After 1 hour, the population
has increased to 420. So b of 1 is equal to 420. Which is also equal to
If we put 1 here, that is equal to 100 e to the kt. Well what's t at b of 1? t is 1. So e to the k, right? So 420 is equal to
100 e to the k. And now we can solve for k. And let's see what we get. So we divide both sides by 100. You get 4.2. Let me put e to the
k on this side. e to the k is equal to 4.2. To solve for k, we take the
natural log of both sides. And we get k is equal to the
natural log of 4.2, which is going to be some
bizarre number. And we can We'll figure that
out later with a calculator. So there we figured out Using
the initial condition here, we figured out I naught. And then using this extra
data point, we solved for k. And we got k is equal to the
ln of the natural log of 4.2. So what does that leave us? So now we know the equation. We know k and we know I naught,
so we know that the equation is So part A, the equation is
b of t, bacteria as a function of time is equal to the initial
number of bacteria, 100 cells, e to the kt. And k is ln of 4.2. That says 4.2. And all of that times t. So that's our function. I know you can't read that,
but we'll use it again. So it should make
a little sense. So then they say find this
is part B find the number of bacteria after 3 hours. So that's pretty
straight forward. We have our function now. That at any time t, we
can tell you how many bacteria there are. So let's figure out the number
of bacteria after 3 hours. So b of 3 is equal to 100 times
e to the ln of 4.2 times 3. And that number we
could calculate if you have a calculator. e to the ln of Let's see. That's essentially Well
what's this going to be? This is the same thing. We can actually figure
this out analytically. That equals 100 e to the
natural log oh 4.2. If you have two things in an
exponent multiplied, that's the same thing as taking that and
then raising it to the third power, right? If we were simplifying, we'd
say oh that's the same thing as just multiplying
that times this. What's e to the ln of 4.2? Well it's 4.2, right? Because natural log says well,
what exponent do I have to raise e to to get 4.2? So if I raise e to that
exponent, I get 4.2. So that equals I didn't even
have to use a calculator, look at that 4.2 to
the third power. And I don't know what that is. That's going to be probably
70 something and so we'll do that later. But that's part B. That's just plugging
into your calculator. That's part B. Now what are they asking? Find the rate of
growth after 3 hours. Let me do that in
a special color. So what are they asking us for? Well they're essentially asking
us what is the slope of this function after 3 hours? Or another way you could view
it is what is the derivative at time is equal to 3? Let's do that. Let me erase all this
other stuff I have. I think we can erase all of
this because we've written down our equation here. We can erase that. Actually we could even erase
all of this because we've just answered that. That's just plugging into a
calculator at this point. Just want to keep our
original equation. So let's do part C. Part C, find the rate of
growth after 3 hours. So we just have to take the
derivative of the bacteria function with respect to time. So let's do that. So b prime of t. It equals what? So what's the derivative of
Let's just do the chain rule. What's the derivative of so
we can have 100 constant out there times the derivative
of this inside function. Well, that's just a
constant times t, so it's just a constant. So times ln of 4.2 times
the derivative of e to the whole thing. Well, the derivative of e
to the x is e to the x. So the chain rule tells us
it's just the derivative of this whole expression. So times e to the ln 4.2t. So that's the derivative
at any time t. And then they want to know
what the rate of growth is after 3 hours. So b prime of 3 is equal
to 100 ln of 4.2. All of that times Well,
e to the As we just did this in part B. e to the ln 4.2 times 3, that's
the same thing as Because this expression right
here is just 4.2. This is times 4.2 to the third. That's just a little bit of
logarithm math we did here. And it's the same exact logic. All I did is I substituted
3 here and simplified. Hopefully that makes
sense to you. If it doesn't, you might want
to use your calculator. But this all is actually a
pretty important thing to know. That e to the ln of x is
just equal to x, right? Because ln of x is essentially
saying what exponent do I have to raise e to to get x? So if I raise e to that
exponent, I get x. So that's all I'm saying here. That this right here is the
same thing as e to the ln 4.2 to the t, right? Because if you were to
simplify, you just take this exponent and multiply
this and you'd get this. And so this is just
4.2 to the t, right? Actually that's I should
have written our original equation as that. I could rewrite our original
bacterial function equation as 100 times using that same
thing times 4.2 to the t power. Actually, that is a simpler
bacterial equation than this one. And so that would be even a
better answer for part A. And then that makes part
B even easier to solve. And then part C. Well part C is actually it
was easier to keep it in this form because taking a
derivative of e is easier than taking a derivative
of another base. And actually we would probably
want to convert backwards. So it's good we left it in that
form because it made the derivative all that easier. But we could rewrite the
derivative as well. We could rewrite this
as b prime of t is equal to 100 ln 4.2. All of that times 4.2
to the t, right? I just took a this Sorry. No. I took this and I
replaced it with this. Anyway, I got a little bit
messier than I wanted to. But then their final
question is when will the population reach 10,000? So let me see erase what
we did with part C. When will the population
reach 10,000? Let me write what we
have already done a little bit neater. We know We knew that, part A,
b of t is equal to 100 e to the natural log of 4.2t. And I said that's the
same thing as 100 times 4.2 to the t power. And they say when will the
population reach 10,000? So they're essentially saying
when is at what time t is b of t equal to 10,000? So we can just say 10,000 is
equal to this: 100 And actually, I'm going to use this
one because I want to take the natural log of both sides. And it just makes
things simpler. 100e to the ln 4.2t. So you could divide
both sides by 100. And you get 100 is equal
to e to the ln 4.2t. And now take the natural
logs of both sides of this equation, right? So then we get what? We get let me draw a
divide Well, I'll do it in a different color. We get taking the natural log
of both sides of this the natural log of 100 is equal
to Well if you take the natural log of e to
something, you're just left with the something. And you might want to review
all the logarithms if you found that a little confusing. But that If you take
the natural log of this side, you're just left
with the exponent. So that equals ln of 4.2t. And if you want to solve for
t, you just divide both sides by ln of 4.2. And you get t is equal
to ln of 100 divided by the natural log of 4.2. And that'll be an hour. So how many hours does it take? You just plug this in your
calculator and you will get a number for the number of hours. Hopefully you didn't find
that too confusing. And actually since Just to
hit another point home, we could have used this equation. And it's the same thing, right? And what would we
would have had? We would have had 100 times 4.2
to t power is equal to 10,000. Divide both sides by 100
and you get 4.2 to the t is equal to 100. And so, to solve this So
you're essentially saying log base You would essentially
want to take log base 4.2 of both sides of this. So you would say t is equal
to log base 4.2 of 100. And I went over this in the
exponent proper in the logarithm properties video. But it's a pretty useful
thing to know in general. How do you figure out Your
calculator has two bases. It has log base 10 and it
has log base e, which is the natural log. How do you figure out log base
of another number of 100? Well, the simple answer is you
could take natural log of this and divide it by the
natural log of this. You could also take log base
ten of this and divide it by log ten base of this
log base ten of this. Anyway, hopefully I didn't
further confuse you. And I will do This was
actually exponential growth. And you could replace
these words. You could say Instead of
saying bacteria culture, you could say a bank account
initially contains $100 and grows at a rate proportional
to its size, which would mean compound interest. And then you could say, after
an hour the population has increased to, whatever, $4.20. And then find the expression
for the number of So essentially, you'd be trying
to figure out the compound interest rate and all of that. But this is the exact
same phenomenon. That the larger you grow,
you're going to grow by an absolute value more than that. Anyway, I'll do more of these
problems because they can be a little confusing. And I'll do one on
exponential decay as well. See you soon. 

Transcript for: AP Calculus BC exams: 2008 1 a | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
I received a suggestion that I
do actual old AP exam problems, and I looked on the internet
and lo and behold, on the college board site, if you go
to collegeboard.com, you can actually get I couldn't find
the actual multiple choice questions, but you can find the
free response questions, and so this question is actually the
first free response question that they have on the calculus
BC that was administered just recently in 2008. So let's do this problem. And frankly, if you understand
how to do all of the free response questions, you
probably will do fairly well on the multiple choice, because
the free response tend to be a little bit more challenging,
especially the last parts of the free response. Well anyway, let's do this one. So I'll just read it out,
because I don't want to write it out all here, but this
is the actual diagram. I actually copied and pasted
this from the PDF that they provide on collegeboard.com. So it says, let r this is r
be the region bounded by the graphs of y equals
sine pi of x. So let me write that down. So this top graph is y
is equal to sine pi x. and then the bottom graph is y
is equal to x cubed minus 4x. And how did I know that
this was the bottom one? Well I knew that this one
was sine of pi x, right? Because sine looks like this. It doesn't look
like that, right? When you go sine of pi
is 0, sine of 0 is 0, sine of 2pi is 0. So we do this as sine of pi x. Well anyway, they want so
this is the region between these two functions and part A
of this and this is kind of the softball question, just to
make sure that you know how to do definite integrals and
it says, find the area of r. So how do we do that? I think you know that we're
going to do a little definite integration, so let's do that. So then we're going to take the
definite integral, so let's just say the area is equal to
I don't know if that's I hope I'm writing big enough for
you the area is going to be equal to the definite
integral from. So what are the x values? We're going to be going
from x is equal to 0 to x is equal to 2. And what's this? At any given point value of x,
what is kind of going to be the high when we're taking the
area, we're taking a bunch of rectangles that are
of dx width, right? So that's that's not dark
enough, I don't think that you can see that so that's
one of my rectangles. Whoops. Let's say that's one of my
rectangles right here that I'm going to be summing up. Its width is dx. What's its height? Its height is going to be
this top function minus this bottom function. So, essentially, we're going to
take the sum of all of these rectangles, so its height is
going to be let me switch colors arbitrarily the height
is going to be the top function minus the bottom function. So sine of pi x parentheses
here minus the bottom function. So minus x cubed plus 4x. Since I'm subtracting, I
switched both of these signs. And all of that times the width
of each of these little rectangles which is
infinitely small dx. And we're going to sum them
all up from x is equal to 0 to x is equal to 2. This should be fairly
straightforward for you. So how do we evaluate this? Well, we essentially take the
antiderivative of this and then evaluate that at 2
and then evaluate at 0. What's the antiderivative
of sine of pi x? Well, what functions
derivative is sine of x. Cosine of x let's see. If I were to take the
derivative of cosine let's say I took the derivative
of cosine pi x. This should be reasonably
familiar to you. Cosine of pi x, if I were
to take the derivative of it, what do I get? That equals pi. You take the derivative
of the inside, right? By the chain rule. So it's pi times the derivative
of the whole thing. The derivative of cosine of x
is minus sine of x, so the derivative to this is going to
be times minus sine of pi x, or you could say that equals
minus pi sine of pi x. So the derivative of cosine of
pi x is almost this, it just has that minus pi there, right? So let's see if we can rewrite
this so it looks just like the derivative of cosine pi x. And I'll switch to magenta. I want to make sure I
have enough space to do this entire problem. So let's write a minus 1
over pi times a minus pi. All I did, when you evaluate
this, this equals 1, so I can do this times sine pi x, and
then that's minus x to the third plus 4x, and then all
of that times the width dx. Well now we have it. We know that the antiderivative
of this is cosine pi x, right? And this is just
a constant term. So what's the antiderivative
of this whole thing? And I'll arbitrarily
switch colors again. The antiderivative
is cosine pi x. So we have minus 1 over pi
cosine pi x remember, I could just carry this over, this is
just a constant term this antiderivative is
this right here. And then these are a little
bit more straightforward. So minus the antiderivative of
x to the third is x to the fourth over 4 plus the
antiderivative of this is 4x squared over 2, or you could
just view that as 2x squared, and then we're going to
evaluate that at 2 and at 0, and let's do that. So this is equal to cosine of
2pi, and we'll have a minus sign out here, so minus cosine
of 2pi over pi, minus what's 2 to the fourth power? Let's see. 2 to the third is 8, 2 the
fourth is 16, 16 over 4 is 4, so it's minus 4, 2 squared is
4 times 2 is 8, so plus 8, so that's the antiderivative
evaluated at 2, and now let's subtract it evaluated at 0. So this will be minus cosine of
0 over pi all right, that's that evaluated at 0
minus 0, plus 0. So these terms don't
contribute anything when you evaluate them at 0. And so what do we get? What's cosine of 2pi? Cosine of 2pi is the
same thing as cosine of 0, and it equals 1. What is the x value of the
unit circle at 2pi, or at 0? It's equal to 1. So this equals minus 1 over pi
minus 4 plus 8, and so this minus minus, those both become
pluses, cosine of 0 is also 1, so plus 1 over pi, and so this
minus 1 over pi and this plus 1 over pi will cancel out, and
all we're left with is minus 4 plus 8 and that is equal to 4. So that is part one, part A of
number one, on the 2008 DC free response questions. It actually took me a whole
video just to do that part. In the next video, I'll do part
B, and we'll just keep doing this, and I'll try to do a
couple of these every day. See you soon. 

Transcript for: AP Calculus BC exams: 2008 1 b&c | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Let's keep doing the first
problem from the 2008 Calculus BC exam. We're on Part b. I think that's too thick. OK it says, the horizontal line
y equals negative 2 splits the region r this is
r into two parts. Write, but do not evaluate, an
integral expression for the area of the part of r that is
below the horizontal lines. Let's draw y is equal
to negative 2. So y equals negative 2
would look like this. y is just a constant. That's not thick enough. I don't know if
you can see that. Let me do it as a thick line
and in a darker color maybe. y is equal to negative 2 will
look something like that. And what they're saying is if
it splits this region r into two parts, this part
and this part. And what they want to know is
an integral expression for the area of the part of r that is
below the horizontal line. So they care about the
area of this part of r. And remember they just want
us to write the expression, not evaluate it. So that'll hopefully
save us time. So how do we figure this out? Well the easy part is actually
to figure out what the expression we're going to take
the definite integral of. And it's going to be a little
bit harder to figure out the boundary points. So what is the expression
within the definite integral that we will use? Well, just like we did in Part
a, think about we're going to take a sum of a bunch
of rectangles. And the height of the
rectangles is going to be the difference between
the two functions. And this is y is equal to
negative 2, and then this function right here is y is
equal to and we had written it down in Part 3 but
that's x cubed minus 4x. That's this curve right here. So the height of each of these
little rectangles is going to be minus 2 minus x to
the third minus 4x. That's the height of each
of these rectangles. And then the width of each of
those rectangles we know from well, just learning calculus or
learning integrals the width is dx. So we're going to
multiply that times dx. And then we're going to take
all of the sums from x is equal to whatever this point is
to whatever this point is. So we need to figure out this
point, this value of f, which is going to be here, and then
this value of x, which is going to be there. And so these are really just
two of the points where these two functions
intersect each other. So how do we figure
out those points? Well what we could do is we can
set them equal to each other, so we could say at what x
values does x to the third minus 4x equal minus 2. At what x values are
the y values the same? So we just set them
equal to each other. If we wanted to write this is a
proper polynomial expression, we would get x to the third
minus 4x plus 2 is equal to 0. And I actually just tried to
record a video where I was doing this on the fly, and I
kept staring at this and I was like, boy, this is a hard
polynomial to factor. I kept trying to guess numbers,
or figuring out I even tried to do Newton's method and I
kept getting weird numbers, and I became suspicious of myself. And then I looked at the
actual test actually I can show it to you. It says right there, a graphing
calculator is required for some problems or parts of problems. And I realized that they
probably want us to use a graphing calculator to
figure out the roots of this polynomial. So let's do that. It's been a long time since I
actually took AP Calculus, and now I remember that a graphing
calculator was a big deal. I just actually downloaded
this TI-85 emulator. So let's use this to figure out
the roots of this polynomial. Let's turn it on. If we want to figure out
the roots we use the poly function, so second poly. What's the order of
this polynomial? What's the third-degree
polynomial? f of x to the third. So order is 3, enter. And what are the coefficients? Well the coefficient on x
to the third term is 1. Go down. What's the coefficient
on the x squared term? Well there is no x
squared term, right? So that coefficient is 0. Go down. What's the coefficient
on the x term? It's minus 4. So minus 4. Go down again. And then the coefficient
or the constant term. Well that's just going to be 2. And now we can just hit solve. And we get three crazy numbers,
and this shows you that this would have been very hard to
solve analytically if you have a normal brain. So let's see. There are three places where y
equals negative 2 intersects y is equal to x to the
third minus 4x. It intersects at minus 2.21. Well that's off of this
graph, that's not even here. That's somewhere
off to the left. This curve probably comes
back down and intersects over there at minus 2. But it also intersects at 1.675
which is probably right here. Right, that looks like 1.675. It also intersects at 0.539,
which is right there. So we can use those values that
our graphing calculator gave us and put it into our
definite integral. So this point right here our
polynomial solver told us is x is equal to 0.539. So we'll put here 0.539. And then this point right
here so this is our limits of integration for our
definite integral, right? We're going to sum up these
little rectangles from x is equal to 0.539 to x
is equal to 1.675. And they told us that they do
not want us to evaluate it, so we are done with Part b. We could just write this
and we should hopefully get full credit. Maybe they'd want you to
simplify this a little bit, but I'd be surprised if they
were mark off for that. Anyway, let's do Part c. If we have time. Part c. So they say the region r
is the base of a solid. For this solid each
cross-section perpendicular to the x-axis is a square. Find the volume of the solid. OK, so this is interesting. Let me see if I can draw it. So that curve, I'm going to
draw it kind of with a perspective so you can see the
solid they're talking about. So it's the same region r. So we had a sin
function on the top. Looks something like that. And then we had that polynomial
function on the bottom that looks something like that. I'm trying to draw
it at an angle. So just to show you the x-axis. This is going to be the x-axis. Let me draw the y-axis. The way I drew it now it
looks something like this. Trying to do a little bit of
perspective so that we can visualize what they're
talking about. So that's the y-axis. So that's x y. And what they're saying, this
is the region r again, just like in the previous two
parts of the problem. They say the region r is
the base of a solid. So this is the base of a solid. For this solid each
cross-section perpendicular to the x-axis. So a cross-section
perpendicular to the x-axis. Let's see if we can draw that. So this would be
a cross-section. So it's like we took a knife
and we cut like this, we cut parallel to the y-axis. Say we took this cross-section
of this solid right now. They say that it is a square. So that means that the base has
to be the same height, has to be the same disk
size as the height. So if we took the cross-section
of the solid here it would be like that. Here it would be a smaller
square like that. If we took the cross-section
there, it would be a small square as well. So what they want us to
do is figure out the volume of the solid. You can kind of imagine
what it looks like. It's small squares and the
squares get really big and then they get small again. So how do we do that? Well we do the same thing. We take the area of each of
these squares we know they're squares times each of the
dx's the small differential and we sum them up
over from 0 to 2. On the first diagram,
I think that was 2. Oh, and I'm about
to be out of time. So I will continue this
problem in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: AP Calculus BC exams: 2008 1 c&d | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
So we were doing part c of the
first problem on the Calculus BC exam, the free response
part, and so what, I'll re-read it, it says the region
r, this is the region r, is the base of a solid. I redrew the region r here, but
with a little perspective, so we can hopefully visualize
it in three dimensions. So it says for this solid, each
cross section perpendicular to the x-axis, right? There's two ways you can do a
cross-section, you could do them, you could cut this
way, but that would be parallel to the x-axis. We wanted to cut perpendicular
to the x-axis, or parallel to the y-axis, right? So if we cut it along
the line like that. So they say, each cross-section
perpendicular to the x-axis is a square. So I drew a couple
of squares here. That's one. So here, this would be the
base, and since we know the cross-section is the square,
the height has to be the same length as the base. Same thing here. So here, the height will be
really high, because this is kind of maybe our maximum point
in terms of the base width. But it's still pretty wide,
then it gets narrow again. So how do we figure out
the volume of this solid? Which is kind of
hard to visualize. And it's in some ways you
easier to visualize it than it is to draw, so you have
to give me some credit. But anyway, what we do is, we
take the area of each of these squares, and I drew
one of them here. You take you each of the area
of each of these squares, multiply them by a super small
change in x, and that we know, from everything we've learned
in calculus hopefully, that that super small change in x,
I'm trying to draw a little perspective, is dx. So if we multiply dx times the
area of this square, that is the volume of this kind of
part the entire solid. And if we were to sum up all of
these infinitely thin solids, we would get the volume
for the whole thing. So how do we do that? Well let's write our
integral expression. So what is the area of
each of these squares? Each of these cross-sections,
what is the area? Well the base is going to
be the difference between our two functions, right? This top function right
here, that was sin of pi x. And this bottom function, right
here, that is y is equal to x to the third minus 4x. So the base of the functions,
the base of this distance right here is going to be the
difference between the top function and the
bottom function. So each base is going to be sin
of pi x, minus this function, so minus x to the third, plus
4x, right switch the sign. Minus x to the third, plus 4x. So far this might look pretty
similar to part a, but what's the twist here? We want the area. The area of each of
the squares, not just this distance. So what's the area? It's going to be this distance
squared, so we have to square this entire thing. So that's the area of each
of these squares, and then we have to multiply them
times a little bit of dx. And that gives us the volume
for each of these, I guess, parts of the entire solid. And then what are our
boundaries of integration? Well it's the same
thing as in part a. This is 0, this is 2. So the boundaries are
pretty straightforward. So we essentially just have
to evaluate this now. And just like in part b, I've
first tried to evaluate this analytically, and you end up
getting a very, very, very hairy integral. Which you can do analytically,
you but you have to know some power reduction formulas in
trigonometry, you have to do some integration by parts, it
would probably use up all of the time on the AP Exam. So since they said that a
graphing calculator is required for some parts of the problem,
I say why not use our graphing calculator? Because the graphing calculator
is very good at numerically evaluating definite
integrals like this. So let's get out my
TI-85 emulator again. Here we go. I want you see the key strokes
so that you, ok turned on, exit out of this. So we're going to use the
calculus function here, so second, calculus. And this function right here,
this is definite integral, a very useful function to use. Press F5, definite integral. And then we just type
in the expression. So the expression, let me
move it down a little bit. So it's open parentheses
sin of where is pi? Pi is  I haven't used one of
these calculators in a long, long time  oh there it is. Second pi x sin of pi x minus x
to the third power, plus 4x. All of that squared. And then this definite integral
function, you have to tell it which is the independent
variable, or kind of, you know, what variable are we
integrating across, and that's the variable x. And then you just tell it the
boundaries of integration, and we're done. So integrate from 0, from x is
equal to 0, to x is equal to 2. If I haven't made a mistake,
I can hit enter, and let the calculator do the
rest of the work. Let's see what it ends up with. OK, 9.  that's the answer,
that is the volume of this solid  it's 9.9783 So you
could write that this is equal to 9.9783. And I'm pretty sure they want
you to use a calculator, because frankly, computing the
integral, that's kind of just chug math, you know, very
mechanical math, although it's pretty sophisticated, but
it would take you forever. But this is kind of, I think,
what they wanted you to do, set up the integral, recognize that
each of the squares, the area of each of the squares is just
going to be this distance, the distance between the
functions squared. And then you integrate
that from 0 to 2. Let's see how much
time I have left. I have a couple of minutes. So let's do part d. The region r models, let me,
paste, oh, I didn't want to do that, edit, undo, edit,
paste, there you go. OK, so I wanted to make
this a little smaller. So what does part d say? The region r models the
surface of a small pond, so that's the surface now. At all points r at a distance x
from the y-axis, the depth of the water is given by h
of x is equal to 3-x. So essentially 3-x is
the depth, right? So at this point of this pond,
the depth is just 3, right 3-0. And at this point, the
depth is 3-2 which is 1. So essentially the pond is
going to get shallower and shallower or as we go
further to the right. You could almost imagine
it, let me see if I can draw it again. So this is the sin function
with some perspective. This is the polynomial
function below it. This is, it's probably drawn
in, that's the x-axis. This is the y-axis. And so here, the depth of the
pond is given by the function h of x is equal to 3-x. So over here, the depth is 3,
so if I were to draw, so if I were to go straight down the
depth is, you know maybe it's 3. And the pond essentially gets
shallower and shallower as we go to the right. So how do we figure out
the volume of this? Over here, what is the depth? It's going to be 1, right, 3-2. This is x is equal to 2. So here the depth
is going to be 1. So if we take the cross-section
just along the x-axis, the depth is going to look
something like this, but then this is the top of it. I know that's kind of
hard to visualize. But anyway, how do we
figure out what the volume of this lake is? But actually, I realize I'm
pushing nine minutes, so I will continue this
in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: AP Calculus BC exams: 2008 1 d | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Welcome back. We're doing the last part
of Problem 1 of the 2008 Calculus BC exam. And I'll repeat the problem. It says, the region R models
the surface of a small pond. At all points in R at a
distance x from the y-axis, the depth of the water is given by
h of x is equal to 3 minus x. Find the volume of the
water in the pond. So we thought about, this is,
you know, a perspective drawing of this, this is the surface
of the pond, right here. And I was trying to
draw the depth. So when x is equal to 0, the
pond is exactly 3, I guess, you know, we could say feet, or
whatever the units are, deep, and then when x is equal to
2, the pond is 1 unit deep. And so to find the volume, we
think about it the same way. What does a cross section
at any point of the pond look like? Well if we, let's see. So if we were to take a cross
section, so let's say that this, let's take this cross
section of the pond. Let me do it in a different
color, I know it can be kind of confusing. That's not too different. So that's green. So the height along the surface
of the pond is going to be the difference between
the two functions. And we know that the top
function is sine of pi x, and we know that this bottom
function is x to the third minus 4x. So if I were to draw, let
me see if I can draw this cross section. So we know this the height,
sorry, the width along the surface of this cross section
is going to be the difference between this function and
this function, right? So if I were to draw, let me
see if I can, so this is that same cross section, it's the
width along the top, I know I'm confusing you, is going to be
this function minus this function. It's going to be sine of pi x
minus x to the third minus 4x. And what's going to be
the height, right here? Well, they told us. The height of the pond, or
the depth of the pond, at any point, is 3 minus x,
whatever x value we're at. So this is going
to be 3 minus x. So the area of this cross
section of the pond is going to be sine of pi x minus x to the
third minus four x times the depth of the pond, right? That's the surface
width times the depth. So that times 3 minus x. So that's the area of
each cross section. So we want the volume for
the entire pond, we take essentially the volume of
each of these kind of slivers of the pond. So we take the area of each
cross section, and we multiply it by a very small width to
get a very small sliver. So we take that and multiply
it by dx, and we integrate. We sum up all of these slivers
of the pond from x is equal to 0 to x is equal to 2. So let's do that. Let's integrate from x is equal
to 0 from x is equal to 2. Once again, this is a
really hard integral. Or it's something that you can
do, especially if you use integration by parts, but it's
a little bit messy, and you only have 45 minutes to do all
three problems on the BC exam, so I'm assuming that they want
you to use the calculator here. So let's use the calculator
to evaluate it. So let's see. So this was part c that we
already have in our calculator. We could do second enter, and
we'll get the previous entry. Second enter. Because we already typed
in a bunch of stuff. The only difference between
what we did in Part C and now is, now, instead of having in
Part C, we had this expression squared. Now, we don't have it squared,
but we're multiplying it by times 3 minus x. So let's do that. So if we go here, we can
delete this squared. We're not squaring it anymore. Deleted. And now let's do, I want
you to see my key strokes. So let's do second insert. So let's insert times 3
minus x close parentheses. And so, let's see. We have sine of pi x minus x
to the third plus 4x, right, that's the same thing as this. Times 3 minus x. And our variable of integration
is x, and we're integrating from x is equal to zero
to x is equal to 2. Let's hit enter. And it noticed, it
is calculating. And our answer is 8.37, I
think, is a fair answer. So the volume this time,
the volume of the pond, is equal to 8.37. Anyway, hopefully you
found that useful. I will, every day, try to do
a couple of these problems. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Calculus BC 2008 2 a | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Let's keep going with our
2008 Calculus BC free answer questions. So we're on problem number 2. And I cut and pasted the table
that they gave for the problem. And I'll read the
rest of the problem. And let's see what we can do. So it says concert tickets went
on sale at noon, t equals 0, and were sold out
within 9 hours. The number of people waiting in
line to purchase tickets at time t, is modeled by a
twice differentiable function L, L of t. So this is the number of people
waiting in line at anytime. And this is noon, 12:00
noon, 1:00 pm, 9:00 pm. All the tickets are
sold by 9:00 pm. And they tell us it's
twice differentiable. So that means that whatever
function we're modeling this, this L of t, that it's
continuous because it's differentiable. And since it's twice
differentiable, we also know that its derivative is
continuous because the second derivative exists
at all points. So it says part a let me make
sure I'm not writing too thickly use the data in the
table to estimate the rate let me actually just copy
and paste this, I've just figured out how to do this. So I figure it doesn't hurt. There you go. You probably can't read it. But it says use the data in the
table to estimate the rate at which the number of people
waiting in line was changing at 5:30 pm. So they don't give us
any data on 5:30 pm. They give us 4:00 pm and
7:00 pm, or t equals 5.5. Show the computations that
lead to your answer. Indicate the units of measure. So what do they want to know? They want to know an estimate
of the rate at which the number of people waiting
in line was changing. So they don't give us a
continuous function definition. They just give us a bunch
of sample points of this function L of t. So the best estimate I can do,
of the rate at which this L of t is changing at time 5.5 and
5.5 is in between these two is to just figure out the
average rate of change between time 4 and time 7. So how do we figure that out? Well the average rate of
change is just the slope. So let's write it. So we could write average
rate of change or delta L over delta t at 5.5. You can write it however you
want, however you think that the exam graders would
best like to see it. We could say at time 5.5. We could say approximately
equals, or whatever. But it's just going to be the
slope between these two points. So it's L of 7 minus L of 4,
all of that over 7 over 4. Rise over run or change in
the value of the function divided by change in the
independent variable. L of 7 is 154. They give us that. L of 4 is 126. And we divide it by 7 minus 4. So that equals 54 minus
126 is 24 plus 26 is 50. So it's equal to 28. Right, if this was 2
less, it would be 30. And 7 minus 4 is 3. So you could say that
the average rate of change is 28 over 3. Or you could write
that as 9 1/3. And they want us to use
the units of measure. Indicate units of measure. So the numerator,
this is people. And what's the denominator? It's hours, people per hour. So my best estimate, or our
best estimate of the rate at which the number of people
waiting in line was changing at 5:30 pm, which is between these
two points, is the average slope between these two points. Which is 9 1/3 people per hour. That's it. Let's do part b. Let me clear all of this so we
have enough space for part b. And I'll copy and don't
know if you can read it. But maybe you can. So doesn't hurt to
just copy and paste. OK part b says, use a
trapezoidal sum with three subintervals. Maybe I can make this
a little bit bigger. Let me see if I can grow
that a little bit. I don't want to take up
all the space though. No that doesn't look good. OK well I'll read it out loud
in case you can't see it. Use a trapezoidal sum with
three subintervals to estimate the average number of people
waiting in line during the first 4 hours that the
tickets were on sale. If you want to do this
really fast, you wouldn't have to graph it. But I'm about to graph it
because I want you to understand how to
do this problem. If you understand it, you
don't have to graph it. So let's graph some
of these points. And we really just have
to do the first 4 hours. Actually let's graph all
of them, just because it might be useful in future
parts of the problem. If you weren't graphing it
while recording a video, it probably would be a
little bit faster. That should be good enough. What are our data points? We have 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. You don't have do it so neatly. Well it's good to do it neatly
when you're doing the exam, because otherwise you'll
confuse yourself. And let's see, how high
should my L values? This is time right here. This is my L of t axis. It goes up to about, 176
is a high point, at least on the data we have. Let's say this is 200. So halfway up would be 100. This would be 150. This would be 50. I don't know what
that sound was from. But let's keep going forward. Let's plot the points. At t equals 0 there are
120 people in line. That's about right there. At t equals 1, 156. I'm just approximating. It's about right there. At t equals 3 they skip
2 at t equals 3 it's 176 people in line. So that's going to be
right about there, just approximating it. At t equals 4, we have
126 people in line. It's a little bit more
than at t equals 0. At t equals 7, we have
150 people in line. It's right about there. At t equals 8 we have 80. That's about right there. And t equal 9, the
line is gone. Everyone has gotten
their tickets, or maybe they got sold out. Let's connect those points. Connect the dots. So from here to there. And from there to there. There to there. There to there, almost done. OK so we've at least plotted
the sample points and connected them with lines. We know that the real L of t,
whatever we used to approximate it, it's not going to have
these sharp edges because it's differentiable. It's actually twice
differentiable. So it's actually going to be
a smoother curve, right? Because we can take the
derivative of any point. If this was the actual
function, you wouldn't be able to take a derivative
at this point. Because there's a positive
slope here and then it immediately switches to a
negative slope like the absolute value functions. You actually wouldn't
be able to take the derivative at that point. But anyway back to the problem. Use a trapezoidal sum with
three subintervals to estimate the average number of people
waiting in line during the first 4 hours. So the first 4 hours,
that's right here. Now this might seem
kind of daunting. The trapezoidal sum
for the fourth. Actually I just realized. For some reason, YouTube used
to let me do longer videos because I thought
I was a partner. But now for some reason it's
been limiting me again. So I will continue part
b in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Calculus BC 2008 2 b &c | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Welcome back. We're doing part b and part
of problem number two. And it says, use a trapezoidal
sum with 3 subintervals to estimate the average number
of people waiting in line during the first 4 hours. And so I just took the data
they gave, graphed it. I did that in the last video. And so, use trapezoidal sum
with 3 subintervals to estimate the average number of people
that sounds very complicated. Like boy, I don't that
sounds yeah, you know, I didn't learn trapezoidal
sums, or however you want to think about it. It could be very confusing. And frankly, I haven't taken
calculus in 20 years. But you really just have to
think about what they're saying, and it's
not that daunting. So what's the average
value of a function? And you learned
this in calculus. You might not remember it. So let's say the average value
of f is equal to essentially let's say, between 2 points, b
and a it's the difference between the 2 points divided by
the area under the curve of f of x. From a to b. Right? That's, I think they call
that the second fundamental theorem of calculus. Or corollary to the fundamental
theorem of calculus, whatever. But it makes sense. Right? The average value of a function
is equal to the area under the curve divided by, you
could kind of say, the base of the figure. Right? Because another way to think
about it, if you just took the average value of the function
so if the function was, say, this, and you just multiplied
that average value times the base, you would get the
same area as the integral. That's another way to view it. You could rewrite
this as b minus a. The base times the average
value is the same thing as the area under the curve. So that's another
way to view it. So let's just apply that here. Let's use the trapezoidal sum
to figure out the area under this curve, or an estimate of
the area under l of t, and then we can divide by b minus a. Or in that case,
b is 4, a is 0. And we'll have the average
value of over the first 4 hours of the people in line. So let's do that. Let me erase it. We're actually not going
to use an interval. We're going to use a
trapezoidal sum to estimate the integral. So it says, 3 intervals. It says a trapezoidal sum
with 3 subintervals. Well, I see, there's 3 very
natural subintervals here. And let me draw them. So this is one. Actually let me I'll
draw the dotted lines. This is one subinterval. This is another subinterval. And there we have it. We have three trapezoids. We have this one, we
have this one, and we have this trapezoid. So we essentially just have
to figure out the area of each of these trapezoids. Let me see if I can draw that
a little bit I drew them in different colors, just so
you can see the trapezoids. So this trapezoid goes goes
from oh, I don't know if I'm doing this right. Let's see. I'll use a line tool. So 1 trapezoid here, and
another trapezoid there. And then another
trapezoid there. And I just need to figure out
the areas of each of these trapezoids, and that's my
estimate of the area under the curve of l of t, from 0 to 4. And then I just divide
it by 4, and I'm done. Part b. So what's the area of
this first trapezoid? Well, what do you do to find
an area of a trapezoid? It's the base. So this area of the trapezoid
right here, this first one, is the base. Which is just 1. 1 times the average
of the two heights. Right? So it's the average. Right here it's 120,
and this is 156. So what's the average
of 120 and 156? Well, the average of 120
and 156 let's see. We get 276 divided by 2 is 138. So it's 1 times 138
or it's just 138. That's the area of
that trapezoid. What's the area of this
trapezoid right here? This bigger one? Well, its base is 2, right? 1, 2. Its base is 2. And what's the average value? Well, it's going to
be the average value between 156 and 176. Or the average value between
this height and this height. That's an easier one, right? 166 is right in between
those two, and we don't have to do much. So it's 2 times 166. Sorry, 166, not 1.66. And finally, what's the average
value of this trap or what's the area in this trapezoid? Well, the base is 1, right? It's going from 3 to 4. 1 times the average value. So 176 and 126. So that is 1/2
times what's 176? Let me use a calculator, just
so I don't make any mistakes. Trusty TI-85 emulator. Let's see. 176 plus 126. Enter. Divided by 2, is equal to 151. So this area right here
is 1 times 151, or 151. So what's the total area? It's just going to be the
sum of these 3 trapezoids. So it's the sum of
those 3 trapezoids. So it's going to be 138
plus 2 times 166 plus 151. So that's the total area
under those trapezoids. But then they ask us,
well, what's the average value of the function? Well, the average value is just
the area divided by the base. The base is 4, right? From noon to 4:00 p.m. or from time equals
0 to time equals 4. So we just divide
this value by 4. So divided by 4, we get 155.25. So they say, use a trapezoidal
sum with 3 subintervals to estimate the average number of
people waiting in line during the first 4 hours that the
tickets were on sale. So the answer to
part b is 155.25. They don't tell us to round it
or anything, so I'm assuming that's, you know, if we're
saying the average number of people, I guess we can
have a fraction there. So that's reasonable. Let's see, what part are we? We're on part c. OK. So part c. I think that's going to
use this graph, too. So let me erase at
least this top part. The top part I can erase. I can erase this,
I can erase that. I want to erase all the
unnecessary things. Let me see if I can let's
see, I can erase all of that. Just want to make it
as neat as possible. I think this graph is going
to come in useful in part c, by just glancing at it. OK. That's good enough, I think. OK, let's do part c. Let me copy and paste it. Part c. OK, copied it. Edit, paste. OK. For t is greater than 0,
is less than 9, right? What is the fewest number
of times at which l prime of t must be equal to 0? Give a reason for your answer. So l prime of t, that's
the derivative of this. When I connected these dots,
I just kind of wanted to get a shape of the curve. But it's really a curve. It's not like this sharp
edged line, right? And how do we know
it's a curve? Because it's differentiable. It's continuous. It's actually twice
differentiable. Which tells us the
derivative is continuous. So the real graph of this is
going to look something you know, let me do it in
a bold color like magenta. You know, it might look
something like this. I don't know, a curve and
then it maxes out at some point, comes down. Then it comes up like this. And then it, maybe it
maxes out, and it comes down like that. It'll be a curve, right? Anyway, they say, what is the
fewest number of times that l prime of t must be equal to 0? Well, what happens when l
prime of t is equal to 0? That means that we are at
a local minima or a local maxima, or sometimes
an inflection point. But we don't know
that for sure. But at minima and maxima point,
we know for sure that l prime of t is equal to 0. And so we can just eyeball it. We could look at this graph and
we could say, well, you know, there has to be a minima point
someplace in this range. Right? Between here and here. So, you know, the way I
drew it, it looks like the slope is 0 there. And between here and here, it
looks like the slope is also going to have to bottom
out at some point. Like there. And then there's a maximum
point right someplace in this range, and it's
going to max out. So when I just eyeball it, I
say, well, I have 2 maximum points, and one minima point,
so the slope is going to equal 0 at at least 3 points, right? But they tell us, give us
a reason for your answer. Give us a reason. And my reason and actually,
you could use Rolle's Theorem or the mean value theorem, but
the simplest reason is that here we have 3 sign changes
in the average velocity. Or the average, not the
average velocity, the rate the l of t. We're not doing velocity
in this problem. So from here let me
use a thicker line. Use yellow. So from here to here,
we have a sign change. From here to here, we
have a sign change. And from here to here, we
could have a sign change. So what I would write down at
the AP exam, is, I was like, well, the function is twice
differentiable, which means its derivative is continuous. So let me write down
the important points. So derivative is continuous. And we have 3 sign changes
in the derivative, right? The derivative is positive over
this interval, or at least its average is positive,
then it goes negative. So at some point, since the
derivative is continuous it doesn't jump around it had
to be positive someplace in this range. And you can be more formal
when you write it. It had to be negative
someplace in this range. So there had to be a sign
change, and so it had to pass through 0. And that same argument could
be used between here and here, and here and here. And that's my answer. And I will continue part d in
the next video, because I'm already over 10 minutes. 

Transcript for: Calculus BC 2008 2d | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Welcome back. We're ready to do part
D, and let me copy and paste that in as well. See, I don't think that's going
to need this graph, so let me just remove that with a
color other than yellow. It's copy and pasted. I don't know if you can read
it, but it's helpful for me to review the problem
on our clipboard. OK. The rate at which tickets were
sold for t  for over this range is modeled by r of t
let me write that in case you can't see it is the rate at
which tickets were sold. r of t is equal to 550 te to the minus
t over 2 tickets per hour. Based on the model, how many
tickets were sold by 3:00 PM? So my t equals 3 to the
nearest whole number? So that's sometimes important. You don't want to give
a decimal answer. So this is the rate at
which tickets are sold. So this is the derivative
of the total tickets sold function. Or another way that we could
write it is the total tickets sold so let's call that, I
don't know, capital T sub well let me I don't want to
do T of t, that's [UNINTELLIGIBLE] So let's say the tickets sold
as a function of time is going to be equal to the definite
integral well, we could say is at any time t, the tickets
sold and this is the fundamental theorems calculus,
I think it might be one of its correlaries or actually
sometimes it is the fundamental theorem of calculus, I always
forget my definitions. Between time equals 0 and t
or if we want to know the tickets sold, between time
equals 0 and t is equal to the integral of the rate at which
the tickets sold was changing. So that's equal to 550te
to the minus t over 2dt. Right? That's it. And so if we want to know how
many tickets were sold at time equals 3, that's just equal to
the definite integral from 0 to 3, or we could also view it as
the area under this curve, from time equals 0 to time equal to
3 of 550te to the minus t over 2dt. Now this integral right here,
you can solve it analytically using integration of parts,
which I just called the reverse product rule, but you only have
45 minutes to do all three of these problems, and they'll let
you use your graphing calculator, and your graphic
calculator is excellent at doing definite integrals, and
they just want the number, right? So let's use our graphic
calculators to get that number. Let's see. I don't want to copy,
so how do we do that? We just do second the division
button but that's calc definite, let me use the
definite integral, and like what was, let's see, let me
make sure I have that 550 let's just use x. 550 times x times second e to
the minus x divided by 2. I think that's the
whole function. And let's see. My independent variable is x,
I've just swapped t for x there, and I'm taking the
integral from 0 to 3. Click enter, let the
calculator do the work. This would have taken you quite
a while if you had to actually do the integral yourself. 972.78, and they want
us to round to the nearest whole number. So the nearest whole
number is 973. So we say 973 tickets
sold by 3:00 PM. And we're done. That only took us four minutes. And it would have taken us
even less if we didn't have to explain it. Anyway. I will see you in
problem number three. 

Transcript for: Partial derivatives | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's now expand our
knowledge of calculus to the third dimension. So first of all, just what
does a function look like in three dimensions? And actually we'll go over
the different types. Because you can have a line in
three dimensions, or kind of a curve in three dimensions. You can have a surface. You could have a vector field. There are different types of
representations we'll see, when we start working
with three dimensions. But I think the most
intuitive and none of these are directly intuitive I
think you have to really be able to visualize them. But the most intuitive, to
me at least, is a surface in three dimensions. And eventually, we can expand
this into n dimensions. But then it becomes very
hard to visualize. So we had our traditional
x and y-axis before, but now let's give another
dimension of height. Let's say that this is my
x-axis and I'll draw the positive quadrant. That's my x-axis. That's the y-axis, and
that's the z-axis. And the convention is to kind
of follow the right hand rule, where the x-axis taking the
cross product of the x-axis with the y-axis is
equal to the z-axis. What do I mean by that? This is x those colors really
don't go well together. This is y. This is z. What do I mean by
the cross product? So if this is the
unit vector in the x direction so that's i. Let's say this is
a length of 1. This is in the
y-direction, so it's j. Oops. j, little cap. And that cap just means
it's a unit vector. It's in y-direction, but
it has a magnitude of 1. And I'll use a
different color for z. z is up. And the unit vector
for there is k. And this is just a convention,
that i cross j is equal to k. And that's just the
convention, you know, for drawing the x-axis. Do we make increasing x
pointing out this way? Or do we make increasing
x point inwards? And this gives us
the convention. So i goes in this direction. I'm trying to make sure I
can do my hand properly. So let me draw the
cross product. So if you take the first
vector, put your index finger in the direction of the first
vector, middle finger in the direction of the second vector,
and your other fingers can do what they need to do. So this is going in
the direction of i. That is going in the
direction of k. Sorry, of j, right? In the y-direction. And then you have your palm of
your thumb, and then your thumb is going to open up
in this direction. Your thumb is going to
point up, which is the direction of k. So that's just a good
to know, where did that convention come from? This is kind of called a
right-handed coordinate system. But let's get to the
meat and potatoes. So how do we define a surface
in three dimensions? Well, we can define z as
a function of x and y. So let's do that. And just the notation, z is
equal to a function of x and y. And all that means is that if
I give you an x-value and a y-value you get a z-value. And so, I don't know,
let's pick one. z is equal to x plus y. So this z is equal to, I don't
know, x squared plus y. So how do we plot the
points on the surface? And I'll show you, actually,
computer generated surfaces that are far more professional
looking than anything I could possibly try to draw. So let's say, what's f of f
of, I don't know, 2 comma 1. Well, that would mean x is 2,
so it's 2 squared plus 1. Well, it equals 5. And if we had to plot that
point of the surface and maybe I'll actually graph this
one in a little bit we go along the x-axis 2. So 1, 2. We go along the y-axis 1. So if you take this point
this is x is equal to y is equal to 1. And then we go and then we
say, well, z is equal to 5. So we can go up here, I don't
know, we'd go up 5 units. And we would plot that point. And you would see, if you
kept doing that, you would plot a surface. You'd plot a surface. And let me clean this
up a little bit. So the natural question that
you might want to ask and actually, let me
show you a surface. I'm afraid that when I
manipulate this graph, it'll slow down my computer and
I'll start sounding like I'm melting. But I'll take that risk. Just bear with me. So here is a surface I use,
using this Java applet grapher. And it's actually free. I'll give you the link for it. But this surface right here,
this is I'll actually show you the graph of this. It'll start taking the
partial derivative. Don't worry about this wall. We'll get to this in a second. But this is a
function of x and y. You can see this is the
x-axis, the y-axis. The height is the z-axis. This'll probably really slow
down my computer, but you can actually rotate it. Look at that. I don't want to slow. I don't want to slow things
too down while I'm trying to do my screen capture. Anyway, I think you'd
understand, where you pick an x-point, you pick a y-point,
and then z this surface right here, without this line
intersecting it this surface right here, is
a function of x and y. So the question is,
well, how do we apply calculus to surfaces? Because actually, let me
bring that thing out again. Because if you look at this
surface, if you were to pick any arbitrary point on this
surface, and say, what is the slope of that surface? Well, it kind of has no
meaning, because you have to kind of pick a direction. If you said, what is the
slope of the tangent line? Any point on this graph
actually has an infinite number of tangent lines. I mean, think of it this way. Take a bowl or something that
maybe you know, like this. And then take a, I don't
know, a toothpick. And make that toothpick tangent
to the bowl, and you can see that on any point on the
bowl, you can just rotate that toothpick around. So you kind of have to pick the
orientation of that toothpick. So what we're going to learn is
when you take a derivative in three dimensions, you have to
specify the direction that you're taking the
derivative in. And this is why I actually
drew this wall here. This wall is the equation
y is equal to 0.3. So you can kind of view it. Along this wall, y is
a constant, right? So if we assume that y is
constant, then maybe we could take just the derivative
with respect to x. So we would essentially
take the slope of this curve right here. And let's figure
out how to do it. So first of all, what is the
equation of this surface? And I just picked one that
they had on Wikipedia. But the equation of that
surface is and I'm going to remove this now, so I don't
sound like I'm melting. The equation of that surface
and let me just clear out everything, just because we'll
probably need the extra space. Go back to the pen tool. The equation is z is equal to x
squared plus xy plus y squared. So we said if we want to take a
derivative, it's hard to you know, you can't just say
there is one derivative. We have to pick a direction. We have to hold everything
else constant and take the derivative with respect
to just one variable. And that is called the
partial derivative. I know it sounds fancy,
but you'll see. It's actually no harder than
taking a regular derivative. You just have to make sure you
remember which variable is a variable, and which
one is a constant. So let's say we wanted
to hold y constant. And we just say, for any
constant y, how much does z change with respect to x? Then we take the partial
derivative this is the notation. You can view it as a d
with the top curled. The partial derivative
of z with respect to x. It equals all we do is we
take this expression we take the derivative of x and we
just assume that y is some constant. So what's the derivative
of 2x with respect to x? Well, it's just 2x. What's the derivative of
xy with respect to x? Well, y is just a number. It's just a constant. Remember, we're taking an
implicit derivative here. y is just a constant. So if you have some constant
times x, the derivative of that is just the constant. Plus y. And then what's the derivative
of y squared with respect to x? Well, we're assuming y
squared is a constant. It's just a number, right?
y is just a number. So the derivative of just
the number with respect to x is just 0. So the derivative of that is 0. So the partial derivative of z
with respect to x is 2x plus y. Now, what does that mean? Well, that means if I were
and actually, let me give you a little notation, before I
show you what that means. Another way to write this exact
same thing is if we wrote that f of xy is equal to the same
thing x squared plus xy plus y squared the partial of f
with respect to x we could have written as this. The partial derivative of f
with respect to x and still a function of x and y, right? It still depends on what
constant y you're using is equal to 2x plus y. Anyway, I thought it's nice
to see that notation. Now, what does this mean? Well, what is the slope of z
with respect to x at, say, when x is 1 and actually,
let's pick smaller numbers. When x is equal to, I don't
know, when x is equal to 0.2 and y is equal to,
I don't know, 0.3. Well, we could use this. The partial derivative of f,
with respect to x, at the point 0.2, 0.3 is equal to 2
times x that's 0.4 plus y plus 0.3. So the slope of this function
with respect to x at the 0.2, comma 0.3, is equal to 0.7. Let's see if we can
visualize that. So that wall represents the
line y is equal to 0.3. And we want the slope at equal
at x is equal to 0.2. So this is x is
0.2, right here. So the rate at which the
height, or the rate at which z is changing with
respect to x, is 0.7. So every time x increases
1, z will increase by 0.7. So the slope is a little
bit less than 1. I think you see that, right? The tangent right here is
increasing with increasing values of x, but a little
bit less than 45 degrees. Anyway, I'm all out of time. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Partial derivatives 2 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Before we move on to other
functions, let's also take the partial derivative of our
function here, f of xy, or the partial derivative of
z with respect to y. So let's do it in magenta. So the partial derivative
of z with respect to y. Well, now we're saying how much
does z change with respect y if x is constant. So this x squared we
treat as a constant now. So the derivative of a
constant with respect to y is 0, so ignore it. Now this xy term. The way we're doing it
now is, y is a variable, x is a constant. So what is the derivative
of, I don't know, 5y with respect to y? Well it's 5. So the derivative of xy with
respect to y is just x. And what's the derivative of
y squared with respect to y? Well it's just 2y. So you can see it's
quite symmetric. The partial of z with respect
to x is 2x plus y, the partial of z with respect
to y is x plus 2y. That's because this equation
is pretty symmetric. The x's and the y's kind
of do the same thing. Now, we picked the point x is
equal to 0.2 y is equal to 0.3. Actually let me erase this,
because I picked a different point where I graph, and I
graphed it ahead of time just to save time. So I don't think I have
to include this anymore. So what I did, I picked
the point x is equal to 0.3, y is equal to 0.3. And when x is equal to
0.3, y is equal to 0.3, what is z equal to? Let's see, 0.3 squared is
0.09, 0.3 times 0.3 0.09. So it's z is equal
to 0.27, right? Just substitute 0.3
in for x and y. z is equal to 0.27. So what is the partial
of z with respect to x at that point? Or we could write, f
sub x at the point y. x is equal to 0.3,
y is equal to 0.3. It equals, we figured that,
let's see 2 times 0.3 is 0.6, plus 0.3, that's equal to 0.9. So the slope in the x direction
at that point is 0.9. And if we take the partial with
respect to y at that same point, 0.3 plus 0.6,
that's also equal to 0.9. Let's see if we can
visualize this. Let me bring in my graph. There we go. So this is, this surface once
again is the surface of z is equal to x squared plus
xy plus y squared. And this box is kind of the
domain, and the x and y dimensions that I define. Kind of, I bounded it because
it starts to increase really fast, and you wouldn't be able
to see all this interesting stuff that happens closer in. But this, what I did, so this
vertical line, I just wanted to show you that when x is
equal to 0.3, y is equal to 0.3, z is equal to 0.7. So that just kind of helps show
you that, ok, that shows what point we're working with. And then these two lines, this
is, if you think about it, this is the line where y
is constant, right? So this is the slope in the
z, or as the surface changes with respect to x at
this point, right? This is the tangent
line relative to x. So you could kind of view
it as, if you hold y constant, here's a tangent
line at that point. And if you hold x constant,
here's a tangent line at that point. And like I said in the last
video, you can actually have infinite tangent lines. You have to pick the direction
that you want to go in the xy plane, and then you could
plot a tangent line. And so that's why we did
partial derivatives to begin with. Actually, this is pretty cool. We can actually take, we can
actually zoom in on this. Zoom it a little bit more. I want to zoom in on the
part that is interesting, let me translate this. So that's the part
that's interesting. And now let me rotate it. So you can actually rotate. So this is the tangent. This shows that the partial
of the function with respect to y, the slope is 0.9. And this line shows that the
partial of the slope, or the partial the function, sorry the
partial of z, or the partial of the function with respect to
x is 0.9, at this point. At the point x is 0.3, y is
0.3, right? x is 0.3, y is 0.3, z is equal to 0.27. And we can rotate it just
to get more intuition. I think it's, the graphing
thing looks a little bit funny sometimes. But you see that both
of those lines are tangent at that point. And in fact, two lines define a
plane, and the plane that's defined by those two lines, or
any of the two tangent lines to that point, defines a tangent
plane to the surface. So a does have only one tangent
plane, but within a tangent plane, there are an infinite
number of tangent lines. Well anyway, that's the
fun with graphing. Now let's just chug through a
bunch of partial derivative problems just so that you get
used to the mathematics of it. Delete that. Let's do some that might
confuse you, so you see how to do them. Let's say that f of xy,
and I'm confining it to three dimensions. Although we can do it more. Actually, maybe I'll do it more
dimensions now that we're not going to try to visualize it. Let's say it's x sine
of x, cosine of y. So let's take the partial
of f with respect to x. This is still going to be
a function of x and y. So we treat y like a constant
So cosine of a constant, this is just going to be a constant. So we can almost ignore that. We could put that out front. We could say that it's going
to be cosine of y times the derivative of this
with respect to x. So you could say, cosine
of y, it's just a number. This cosine of y could
just be, I don't know, 5 or pi, or whatever. Cosine of y. And then, because when you take
the derivative the constant just comes out of
the derivative. And then we would take the
derivative of the x's. So the derivative of the
first term with respect to x, well that's just 1. Times the second expression. So sine of x, I'm just doing
the product rule here. Plus the derivative of
the second expression, that's cosine of x. Cosine of x is the derivative
of the second expression, times the first expression, times x. So If we wanted to expand it
all out, the partial of f with respect to x, this is
the function of x and y. It equals sine of x, cosine of
y, plus, let's put this x out front, just so we change the
order. x, cosine of x, cosine of y. Not too difficult. You just have to realize
that anything with the y is a constant. So let's reverse it. Well, not reverse it. Let's take the partial
now in the y direction. How much does f change
in the y direction if we hold x constant. So the partial of f with
respect to y, still a function of x and y. The derivative in
that direction is a function of x and y. So now x is a constant. So this actually becomes
pretty straightforward. This whole x, sine of x,
if x is some number, 5, this is just a constant. So we can just write
that out front. So that's just x, sine of x. I know it's hard for you to get
used to saying that, oh, x sine of x, that's just a
constant number. Because you're so used to
taking the derivative with respect to x. And that's the hardest
part about doing these partial derivatives. But anyway, this is
just a constant term. And now we just take
the derivative of this with respect to y. The derivative of cosine
of y with respect to y is minus sine of y. I'll do that in yellow. Minus sine of y. I just want to put
the minus out front. Minus sine of y. There you have it. Let's do another one. And actually I'm going
to add more variables. Let's say that, I don't know,
just so you get used to the different notation. x is equal to a squared times,
I don't know, a squared times b to the third, times
c to the 1/2 power. Now what is the partial
derivative of x with respect to a? Well everything else
is just a constant. What's the partial of a
squared with respect to a? Well it's 2a. So it'll just be 2a
times the constants. Times b to the third,
c to the 1/2. I can actually get rid of
my parentheses there. What's the partial derivative
with respect to b? Ah, sorry, what's the partial
of x with respect to b? Well now, a squared and c to
the 1/2 are just constants. We can just write that. a
squared, c to the 1/2. And now we just take the
derivative with respect to b. Well that's 3b squared. Times 3b squared. If I just want to rearrange
it, that's 3a squared, b squared, c to the 1/2 power. Not too difficult. You just have to keep in mind
what's constant and what's not. And then finally, the partial
of x with respect to c. a squared, b to the third,
those are both constants. a squared, b to the third
times derivative of this with respect to c. 1/2 c to the minus 1/2. Or we could rewrite this as
a squared, b to the third, over 2 square root of c. Just a little bit of
algebraic manipulation. Anyway, I will see you
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Gradient 1 | Partial derivatives, gradient, divergence, curl | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's learn a little bit about
the gradient, and we'll use the same function we've been using
since we're pretty familiar with it's graph and it's
partial derivatives. So let's say that f of x y is
equal to x squared plus x times y plus y squared. Now we're going to take the
gradient of this, and then I'll give you a little bit of
intuition on what a gradient is. We're going to take the
gradient in two-dimensional space, and you'll see what
that means in a second. You can extend this
to any dimension. So the gradient that we use
this vector differential operator this upside down
triangle the gradient of f is equal to the partial of f in
the x direction times the unit vector i which is the unit
vector in the x direction so it gives the magnitude of the
slope and the x direction, and then it points the vector in
that direction plus the partial with respect to
y in the j direction. And obviously if there's a
function of more variables you could keep going and you'd
multiply the magnitude of the derivative in each of those
dimension's directions times the unit vector in
that dimension. Well what does this mean? And another way to view it, you
could have also written this as the gradient of f is equal to
the partial with respect to x of f of x y and then all of
that in the i direction. This is just
different notation. Plus the partial with respect
to y times f of x y. Not times, operated
on f of x y. So the partial of f of x y
with respect to y times the j unit vector. And because of this notation, a
lot of people view this delta operator and actually it's
pretty consistent when we learn about the divergence and the
curl a lot of people view this delta operator, they
actually define it. They say that is equal to the
partial with respect to x in the i direction plus the
partial with respect to y in the j direction. And then if you wanted to do it
into three space that's not going to apply to our problem
because we only care about two dimensions right now. And you'll see what I mean. Because even though we're
applying it to a three-dimensional surface, but
then you can do the partial with respect to z
times the k vector. And then you could extend it to
n dimensions, but it becomes very hard to visualize. Actually it becomes hard
to visualize beyond what we're doing right now. So what does this mean? Well before I go into what it
means, let's actually calculate it for this and then I'll
show you what it means. Let's actually calculate
the gradient of f. So the gradient of our
particular function, it's a partial with respect to x. So we figure that out. That's 2x plus y, and then
that doesn't matter anymore. So it's 2x plus y. That's the partial of this
function with respect to x. And we multiply that in
the i direction, or in the x direction. Plus the partial with respect
to y, and this is 2y plus x. And we calculated this in
the two videos on the partial derivatives. And we multiply that
in the j direction. So what does that look like? Well what are each of the
components of this vector? What is 2x plus y in
the i direction? What does that
vector look like? What is 2y plus x in the
j direction look like? And this I have graphed. So this is the same surface
we've been working with, but now I've plotted these
points right here. These are just points that the
software has picked to actually display these vectors. And if you look at it,
this is the x-axis. And I can rotate this. I can pull it down
a little bit. And then I can spin it around. I think that's pretty neat. But anyway. This parallel to this
line is the vector in the x-axis, right? So at this point I've actually
calculated the gradient. This vector says, what is the
magnitude of this vector is the partial derivative of the
function, or the partial derivative of the surface,
or the partial derivative of z with respect to x. And it's direction, it just
goes in the x direction, because it's that times
the i unit vector. So this vector is the partial
derivative of z with respect to x times the i unit
vector at that point. So we just calculated
the partial derivative at that point. It gave this length. And then the direction is just
the i unit vector, or in the direction of increasing x. Similarly, this vector right
here I hope you can see it. Let me see if I can actually
zoom in a little bit. That might be useful. Zoom in, there you go. And I wanted to see the axes,
which you can't see now that I'm zoomed in, but you took my
word this was the x direction. Now this is the y direction,
or the same direction as the j unit vector. The j unit vector goes in
the same direction as y. And the magnitude is determined
by the partial derivative of z with respect to y
at that point. And that's the magnitude. And we saw there was some
symmetry, so the magnitude of this vector is the same as the
magnitude of this vector. And then when you add the
two vectors together, you get this vector. And notice that none of these
vectors have any dimensions in the z dimension. They're all kind of giving you
directions in the x y plane. And why is that interesting? Well the gradient and this is
the intuition the gradient tells you the direction in the
x y plane you should travel in order to get the maximum
slope in the z dimension. Or another way to view it. Remember the partial derivative
with respect to x said what is the slope in the x direction. The partial derivative with
respect to y said what is the slope in the y direction. But you could take the partial
derivative with respect to any direction, and the gradient
gives you the direction in which the slope is the largest. So let me zoom out a little bit
because I want you to see the actual axes There's the axes So
all this says if I were to go in this direction, I
get the maximum slope. So if I go in this direction,
my z goes up like that. Let me see if I can rotate
this a little bit. I don't want to
scale it anymore. Let me do the rotated. See if I can show that to you. So if I go in that direction in
the x y plane, I get maximum z. If I go in that direction I
get a maximum upward slope. That's what the gradient tells
you, how do you get the maximum upward slope. And if you were to take any
closed line where the z is constant well actually I
don't want to get into that too much, but this gradient will
actually be normal to any, or it'll be perpendicular to any
curve where z is constant. I don't want to get too
involved with that right now, so let's go back here. Maybe it's more clear if we
look from below the graph. So if you go to this point
right here, this is the magnitude of this vector,
shows what is the slope in the x direction. The magnitude of this vector
is what is the slope in the y direction. And then when you add them
together, you get the gradient. And the gradient says, well, if
I travel in this direction in the x y plane notice that
none of these have any z's. The plane defined by all
of these vectors is all flat in the z dimension. But if I would have traveled
this direction in the x y plane, then I will get the
maximum increase in z per unit that I travel. And let's actually show
you what it looks like in the x y plane. So if I just go head on so
I'm above the graph looking straight down at the graph, and
then the colors just show kind of you know where we are if I
travel in this direction in the x y plane, I get my
maximum increase in z. If I'm here notice here the x
component of the gradient is much larger than
the y component. So I need to travel a little
bit more in the x direction, and I'll get the maximum change
in z if I travel there. Another way to think about it. If I'm on a hill, the gradient
of that surface will tell you at any point what direction you
need to travel in to go up the hill fastest. Or the direction which
the steepness of the hill is maximum. This is more of a bowl as
opposed to a hill, but anyway. I'll just rotate it around. Hopefully that
makes some sense. And I want you to think
about it a little bit more. And we'll do a few more
problems where we just calculate gradients, just
because I think it's useful to get the mechanics. But in my opinion at least the
intuition is a little bit harder to get your head around
than the actual mechanics, but once you get it, it
makes a lot of sense. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Gradient of a scalar field | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video we had a
three-dimensional surface, where the height z was
a function of x and y. And it gave us surface in
three-dimensional space. Now let's try to get our heads
around what the gradient of a function of three
variables looks like. So the easiest one for me to
imagine is a scalar field. So what's a scalar field? One that I find fairly
intuitive is temperature in a three-dimensional room. So let's say the temperature
in a room is a function of where I am in the room. So let's say it's a function of
my x, y, and z coordinates. And I don't know, I have never
actually modeled temperature. But let's say I have, I don't
know, a 20 kelvin actually, let me make it so that our
vector field works out right. Let's say we have a 10
kelvin heat force in the center of our room. I can imagine as you go further
and further away from that heat source it's going to
get colder and colder. So let's say that the
temperature function. And let's say that center of
the room is at the coordinates x, y, and z is equal to 0. So let's say our temperature
function I'm just making this up, I don't know if this is an
accurate model of temperature it's equal to 10 times e
to the minus r squared. Now why did I say r? I said it's a function
of x, y, and z. Well I'm just saying that it
exponentially decays as you get further and further
away from that source. Kind of radially further and
further away from that source. So what's the radial
distance away? And this actually isn't that
relevant to learning gradients, but let's get a little
intuition about what that actual temperature function
how it actually changes as you go through the room. So the radius away from the
center, that's just going to be r squared is just x squared
plus y squared plus z squared. That's just the Pythagorean
theorem in three dimensions. So let's write our
temperature function. So let's write temperature as
a function of x, y, and z is equal to 10 e to the minus x
squared plus y squared plus z squared which is exactly
what I wrote up here. Instead of x squared plus y
squared plus z squared, I wrote r squared, just to kind of give
you the intuition that this expression is just saying the
square of the distance as we get away from the center of
our room, or from the coordinate 0, 0, 0. But that's not what
we're learning here. But I want you to understand,
at least conceptualize this, it's hard to draw
a scalar field. All a scalar field means is
that in any point in this base and in this case we're
dealing with three-dimensional space at any point in that
space we can associate a value. And that makes sense. If you were to take a
thermometer and measure any point in space in the room
that you're in right now, you would get a temperature. You wouldn't get a temperature
and a direction, so it's not a vector field. You would just get
a temperature. And that's why it's
called a scalar field. Associated with every
coordinate is just a temperature. So how would we view the
gradient of this function? Well the gradient of this
function is going to tell us in which direction and actually,
the gradient of this function is going to generate a vector
field, because it's going to tell us in which direction
do we have the largest increase in temperature. And also, the magnitude of
those vectors in that vector field will tell us how large
of an increase in temperature we are looking at. Or you can kind of
view it as almost a three-dimensional slope. Hope that doesn't confuse you. So let's compute the gradient,
and then I'll show you a diagram that might make things
a little bit more intuitive. Let me erase this
thing down here. And I'm going to switch from
this blue color, because it's a little nauseating. So the gradient of T is going
to be equal to the partial derivative T with respect to x
times the unit vector in the x direction, plus the partial
derivative of the temperature function with respect to y
times the unit vector in the y direction, plus the partial
derivative of the temperature function with respect to z
times the unit vector in the z direction. And now we just plug and
chug and figure out the partial derivatives. So the gradient of T is equal
to now you might be daunted. Oh, I have an e to this three
variable function, how do I take the partial derivative? Remember, if you're taking the
partial derivative with respect to x you just pretend like the
y's and the z's are constants. So let's do that. So let's take the derivative
of the inside function. That's the way I view it. So minus x squared plus y
squared plus z squared, with respect to x. So you could distribute
this minus if you like. So it'd be minus x
squared minus y squared minus z squared. So the derivative of that with
respect to x is just going to be these are just constants,
so the derivative with respect to x is just 0. So the derivative is minus 2x. Right? Minus 2x is the derivative
of minus x squared. Minus 2x times the
derivative of the outside. Well, what's the
derivative of e to the x? The derivative of e to
the x is e to the x. That's why e is such
an amazing number. And this 10 here, this is just
a constant that when you take the derivative of a constant
times something the constant carries over. So the derivative of the
outside expression, the way I imagine it, is equal to 10 e
to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared. And then all of that times the
unit vector in the i direction. Right? And now we can do the same
thing for the y direction. So plus what's the
partial derivative of this with respect to y? Well it's going to
look very similar. The partial derivative of this
inner function with respect to y, it's minus y squared. So it's minus 2y. And then the derivative
of the whole thing is just itself again. So times 10 e to the
minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared. And then all of that times
the unit vector in the y direction times j. And then finally, the partial
derivative of the temperature function with respect to z. And that's just minus 2z times
10 e to the minus x squared plus y squared plus z squared. This is just the chain rule. And I'm treating the other two
variables that I'm not taking the partial derivative with
respect to, as constants. And then all of that times the
unit vector in the k direction. And we could simplify
this a little bit. You could have
minus 2x times 10. That's minus 20x. Let me write it up here. So the gradient of the
temperature function is equal to minus 20 e to the minus x
squared plus y squared you probably can't read this plus
z squared, times i minus 20y. And actually, I'm not going to
go into that, because I realize I'm running out of time. I think you can simplify
this algebraically. But anyway, the more important
thing is I always find with gradients it's easy to
calculate them, but the intuition oh sorry. This is also included. This is a k right here. The harder part is
the intuition. So let's get an intuition of
what this gradient function will actually look like. So what would happen. If you wanted to know the
gradient at any point in space, you would substitute an
x, y, and z in here. So you could write it as
the gradient function is a function of x, y, and z. Remember, T, the temperature at
any point, was a scalar field. At any point in three
dimensions it just gave you a number. Now when you have the gradient,
at any point in three dimensions it gives
you a vector. Right? Because it has i, j,
and k components. Where the magnitude are the
partial derivatives, and then the direction is
given by i, j, and k. So we've gone from having a
scalar field to a vector field. And let's see what
it looks like. And let me make it bigger so we
can explore it a little bit. I think that's pretty good. So this is the vector field. This is actually the gradient
of the function that we just solved for. And as you can see, at any
point and when this graphing program that did it, it just
picked different points and it calculated the gradients at
that point, and then it graphed them as vectors. So the length of the vectors
are just the magnitudes of the x, y, and z components. And then you add them together
like you would add any vectors. And then the direction is given
by the relative weighting of the i, j, and k components. And as you can see, the
intuition is pretty interesting. As you get closer and closer to
our heat source, the rate at which the temperature
increases, increases! Right? The vectors as you get closer,
get bigger and bigger. And let me zoom in. Let's actually fly in
to the vector field. So we're now within
the vector field. And you can see as we get
closer and closer to the center of our heat source, the
vectors, the rate at which the temperature increases, gets
bigger and bigger and bigger. Anyway, I hope I
didn't confuse you. When I first learned gradients,
I think the computation is relatively straightforward. It's just partial derivatives. But the intuition is always
the interesting thing. And hopefully this temperature
analogy and not even analogy this temperature
model will make a little sense to you. But it applies to pretty
much any scalar field. Anyway, I'll see you
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Divergence 1 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's try to get our heads
around the idea of divergence. So first, like I did with
gradients, I'll show you the mechanics, which are actually
pretty straightforward. And then I'll try to
give you the intuition. And once you have the
intuition, at first it will seemed very, I don't
know, unintuitive, maybe. But it once you get it,
you're like oh, that's it. So let's see what
divergence is. Let's say I have
a vector field. And let's say this vector
field, just for the purposes of visualization it could be
anything, but let's say it represents the velocity of
particles of fluid of any point in two dimensions. So it's going to be a
two-dimensional vector field. It's going to be a function of
x and y, so the velocity at any point it's a vector field 
let's say it is, and I'm just going to make up something. Let's say it's x squared, yi. So at any point in the
x-direction, at any point x comma y, its velocity in the
x-direction will be x squared, y. And then its velocity in the
y-direction, I don't know maybe it's just 3y, j. That's its velocity
in the x-direction. So its velocity in the
x-direction is actually a function of x and y. its velocity in the y-direction
is just a function of y. So what is the divergence? So a couple of ways
we can write it. The correct way to write
it is the divergence of our vector field, v. But a common mnemonic to
remember the operation of diverge and is to write the
upside down triangle, which was the same notation we used for
gradient, but take the dot product of that and the vector. And if you remember from the
gradient discussion, we said that you can view, although
it's kind of an abuse of notation, but you could view
this upside down triangle as being equal to the partial
derivative with respect to x in the x-direction plus the
partial derivative with respect to y in the y-direction,
which is the j-unit vector. And then if we went to three
dimensions, the partial derivative with respect to
z and the k-direction, et cetera, et cetera. But we're dealing with a
two-dimensional vector here, so let's just stick with
two dimensions, x and y. So what would this
turn out to be? If you took the dot product of
this, which is this upside down triangle, with this vector
field, what would you get? Well, you would just get the
partial derivative of the x dimension with respect to x, so
you would get it's actually pretty straight forward to
memorize; you might not even need this mnemonic right here,
this abuse of notation; you might just know it off hand
the x component, you take the partial derivative with respect
to x, and the y component, you take the partial derivative
with respect to y. But I'll show you why it
looks like the dot product. So if you took the dot product
of that and that, it would be the partial derivative with
respect to x of that expression, of x squared, y and
then plus the partial derivative with respect to y of
that second expression, the y component of 3y, and then
you would evaluate it. What's the partial derivative
of this with respect to x? We just pretended y is a
constant, just a number, so the derivative of this with
respect to x, would be 2x times the constant. So it'll be 2xy plus what's
the partial derivative of 3y with respect to y? Well, there's nothing else to
hold constant, so it's just like taking the derivative
with respect to y so it's 2y plus 3. So this is the divergence
at a point x, y. You could almost view it
as a function of x and y. So you could almost say you
know, that the divergence of v I'm going to make up some
notation here as long as you get the point across, you can
say that the divergence of v, that this is a
function of x and y. That we just have an expression
that if you give me a point anywhere in this vector
field, I can tell you the divergence at that point. So I think you'll find that
the computation of divergence isn't too difficult. You just take the partial
derivative of the x component with respect to x, and you add
that to the partial derivative to the y component
with respect to y. And if you had the z, you
would do the same thing, so on and so forth. Actually, let me do just do one
more just hit the point home, and then we'll work
on intuition. So if I said that I had, I
don't know, let's say, my vector field is cosine of yi
plus so it's interesting; my x-direction is dependent on
my y-coordinate plus, I don't know, e to the xyj. So then oh, that's difficult
because I have these e's and these cosines. But we'll see; if you just
keep your head straight on what's constant and what's
not, it's not too bad. So the divergence of v is equal
to the partial derivative of this expression
with respect to x. Well, what's the derivative
of this with respect to x? If y is just a constant,
cosine of y is just a number. So the derivative of this with
respect to x is just 0 plus what's the derivative of
this with respect to y? Well, you could just do x,
since it's a constant, as the coefficient on y. So the derivative of x, y
with respect to y is just x. And then the derivative of e
to anything is e to anything. I just did the chain rule. e to the x, y. And so that is the divergence. So you could just ignore this. It's x, e to the x, y. One thing to immediately
realize, even before we work on the intuition, is when we did
gradient I gave you a surface and it gave us a vector field. Or I gave you a scalar field
and you got a vector field. When you take the divergence of
something, you're going in the opposite direction,
in some ways. You start with the
vector field, right? And what's a factor field? It's something that if you
give me any point x and y, I'll give you a vector. So if you wanted to graph it,
in the x, y plane you'd have a bunch of vectors, and I'll show
you how that looks in a second when we go over to intuition. Well, when you take the
divergence of it, you get a value for any point x, y. So even though a vector field
has all these vectors on it, the divergence tells you an
actual scalar number at any point in the field. So let's get a little bit
of intuition of what a divergence actually is. Let me do it in one dimension. Or we can even, let's do it
in two dimensions, but I'll make it constant in the y. So let's say that my let me
erase this; I'll probably need some space. OK, oh, I didn't want
to do that dot. OK let's say the velocity of
fluid, or the particles in fluid, at any point in the x, y
plane, let's say it is equal to 5xi plus, I don't know, 0y
there's never any, sorry 0j, right? j is the unit vector
in the y-direction. So there's never a y component
to the velocity vector. So what would that look like? I don't need a computer
to draw this. I can handle this
one myself I think. So if that's the y-axis,
that's my x-axis. So when x is equal I'll just
sample some points and draw some vectors when x is equal
to 1 let's say x is 1 there what's the magnitude
of this vector? It'll be 5, right? Actually, let me make this a
different number, because it'll make it hard to do. Let's make this 1/2 x. So when x is 1, the magnitude
of my vector is 1/2. Only in the x-direction. It has no y component;
ignore this right here. It's 1/2xi plus 0j. Or you could just say 1/2xi. And when x is equal to 2 I
could have picked any points, but I'm just picking the
numbers that's easy to calculate when x is equal to
2, what is the magnitude of the vector? It's 1/2 times 2, which is 1. So it's going to
be twice as big. And remember, if I have a
particle right here in my fluid, if this is a particle,
its velocity in the x-direction is going to be 1 meter
per second to the right. If I have a particle here, it's
velocity in the x-direction is going to be 1/2 a meter
per second to the right. Let's just do one more point. So let's say that
x is equal to 3. What's my velocity
to the right? I'll do it in a different
color just so that you don't get confused. There's going to be 3/2; it's
going to be even longer. But the general idea here,
and as we move up in x it doesn't change much, right? It doesn't change at all. Our x value doesn't [COUGHS]. So for any y, the magnitude
of the vector doesn't change, right? It's only dependent on x. And then for example, here,
it'll be even longer. If we draw the vector here
it'll be even longer, right? If you do it here. I think you get the point. The further you go to the
right, the faster the particles are moving towards the right. So now let's try to get a
little bit of intuition. Oh, I just realized that I ran
out of time, so I will continue this in the next video. 

Transcript for: Divergence 2 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
So where we left off I was
attempting to give you the intuition of divergence and
then I ran out of time. But anyway, I had defined this
fairly straightforward vector field that tells us the
velocity of particles in a fluid at any given point. And let me clean it
up a little bit. This one half I had all
these scratch offs. The velocity, I'm just going to
rewrite it, is equal to 1/2xi. So at any given point
has no y component. So all of the velocity is only
in the x direction  there is no upwards movement
in the xy plane. And I was drawing it out. I said OK, when x is equal
to 1, the magnitude of the velocity is 1/2 maybe meters
per second, if that's our unit. When x is equal to 2, the
velocity to the right will be 1 meter per second,
right  1/2 times 2. So the further we go to the
right, or the more we go to the right, the faster the particles
are moving to the right. So now let's try to get
our handle on what divergence means. So first of all, let's
take that the divergence of this function. So that divergence of v, of our
velocity vector field  you could also view that if you
want to abuse some notation, is our del vector, dot v. But if we only have one
dimension, so it's the partial derivative of the x
magnitude with respect to x. So what's the
partial derivative? So it's equal to the
partial derivative with respect to x, of 1/2x. So it's equal to  well the
derivative of this with respect to x is just equal to 1/2 . So that divergence of
this vector field at any point is 1/2. Now what does that tell us? Well, if you just look at the
definition, right, we essentially just took the 
how much does the magnitude of the field increase
in the x direction? And we see it visually. As we go, increase in the x
direction, the field gets stronger and stronger. Or since we know that this is
the velocity of particles, as we go in the x direction, the
particles go faster and faster to the right. Now what this tells us, what
this positive divergence tells us is if we were to take
 let's just take an arbitrarily small circle. I think it'll start to make
sense once I draw the circle. If I take an arbitrarily  I'm
going to draw it in a different color  and this circle could
be arbitrarily small, but I'm drawing it pretty large so
it can include some of our vectors that I've drawn. What's happening? On the right hand side, I have
particles exiting really, really fast, right? And let's say in a given amount
of time, let's say in one second, in one second out of
the right side, since the particles are moving really
fast, I'm going to have a bunch of particles leave
the right hand side, right? And in the same amount of time,
I will have some particles come in through the left hand
side, but it's going to be a fewer number of particles. So the way you could think
about it is in any given amount of time, what's happening? In this space, I have a few
particles entering in through the left, and I have a much
larger number of particle leaving through the right. So what's going to
happen in this space? It's going to become
less dense, right? Because in that space is going
to be fewer particles after a certain amount of time. More are leaving
than are coming in. So this positive divergence
tells us that at that point, or really at any point in this
vector field since the divergence is 1/2 everywhere,
at any point in this vector field, the field is
becoming less dense. Or you could say that more
is flowing out of any point than flowing in. It makes sense, right? Because if as we move to the
right, and it kind of gets funky if you go into the other
quadrant, so we'll stick to the first quadrant while we're
trying to get our intuition. But it makes sense, because
as we move to the right our particles are getting
faster and faster. And that kind of just falls out
of the fact that our derivative with respect to x is positive. The slope of how much
our x component is increasing is positive. So as we go to the right, our
velocities are going getting faster and faster, which means
if we were to draw a circle anywhere, we're always going to
have more exiting the right than entering through the left. So we're going to be getting
less dense at any given point. Or you could almost view it as
any given point is almost a source of particles, or if you
have a sphere, more particles are going to be coming out of
the sphere through the right, than coming in through
the sphere to the left. So you could view a positive
divergence as you could kind of say well, the field is becoming
less dense at that point, or the point is a source of the
field, or it's a source of particles, depending on what
model you want to use. Now, with that said, let's
take the opposite situation. Let's say that the vector
field is equal to is minus 1/2x times i. And so the divergence  I'll
use this notation  the divergence of our vector field
is just a partial derivative with respect to x, which
is just minus 1/2. If I were to graph it
 this is my y-axis, this is my x-axis. So here at like, say, the
point 1, my velocity is going to be the left 1/2. At the point 2, my velocity
is going to be the left 1 meter per second. At the velocity 3,
it's going to be 3/2. You know it doesn't
depend on y. It only depends on x. So now let's draw a
little circle and see what's happening. Let's draw it here. It could be anywhere. It's infinitely small,
but we're just trying to get some intuition. So after a certain amount
of time what's happening? Let's say after a second. Well, I'm having a few
particles leave through the left hand side, right, but I
have many more particles entering this little region
that I've defined, this little circle, I'm having many more
particles enter through the right in a given
amount of time. So in any given amount of time,
in my defined space, it's going to get denser and denser. There's going to be more
and more particles in that space over time. So it's getting denser or you
could almost view it as this space is sucking up particles. In the previous example it was
a source of particles  more were coming out than going in. Now more going in through
the right than coming out. And that's what a
negative divergence. You could almost say 
let's think about the word, divergence. When it's positive, if I have
a positive divergence, the particles or the field is
diverting out of that point. If I have a negative
divergence  maybe let's define a new term. I've never actually heard it
this way, but maybe a negative divergence we view as
a convergence, right? Converge is the
opposite of diverge. So here, even though some
particles are leaving through the left, many more particles
are coming through the right, so it's getting
denser and denser. And that's this example here. And actually at every point
in this field we have a negative divergence. So every point is getting
denser and denser actually everywhere in this field. And then the classic example of
a divergence, although I wanted to show you that what matters
is the net that's coming in to a certain area. But the classic example of a
divergence is a field that looks something like this. Where maybe that's the x 
that's the y, this is the x. If you have a field that looks
something like this, this is the classical example of a
negative divergence, right? Where from every direction
you have particles entering, nothing's leaving. So obviously, in any given
amount of time, that point is getting more and more dense. And the classic example of a
positive divergence is a point where from every direction
things are leaving it. So clearly this area is
going to become less dense. If we're talking about velocity
of particles, after any moment in time, more particles are
leaving than coming in because no particles are coming in. Now what does it mean if
we have a 0 divergence? So let's try to create a vector
field that has a 0 divergence. And we'll just stay at
a one-dimension just for the intuition. So that means that the
partial derivative with respect to x is 0. So let's say my
vector field is 5i. So the magnitude is always
5 in the i direction. So let me draw that. Vector field is always 5. Another way to think of it
if you have a constant vector field. So the magnitude of the
vectors, no matter what my value of x, is always
going to be the same. It's always going to be 5. So if I were to draw a region,
what's happening here? Are more particles
entering than leaving or leaving than entering? No. For any amount that's coming
in, an equal amount are coming out in a certain amount of
time, if we use velocity as our example. So when you have a divergence
of 0, that means that that part of the field is not becoming
any more or less dense. And you could have done it
 let me show you another. If my function was, let's
say it equals 2i plus 2j. It's still a constant, right? So this velocity field or
vector field will look something like this. All the points would
be, the vectors would have a slope of 1. But I just wanted you to see
something in two dimensions. I'll do a fancier example
in the next video. But even here, if I were to
draw some region, the same amount is entering as exiting. So it's not getting any
denser at any point. And that makes sense because
the divergence of this vector field  well, both of them
actually, the divergence of that vector field. The partial derivative
of 2 with respect to x, well that's 0. Plus the partial derivative
of 2 with respect to y. Well, that's also 0. Anyway, I've run
out of time again. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Divergence 3 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Now let's do a slightly fancier
example, then we'll try to analyze the vector field. And hopefully this will
make everything a little bit more tangible. So let's say that the velocity
of the fluid, or the particles in the fluid, at any given
point in the x-y plane, let's say in the x-direction, it is x
squared, x squared minus 3x plus 2 in the x-direction, plus
y squared minus 3y plus 2 in the y-direction. Make it simple so that we only
have one thing to factor. So let's just do
the math first. Let's figure out the divergence
of our vector field, the divergence of our field. And going to show you a graph
of this field soon, so we'll get an intuition of what it
actually looks like, instead of my not-so-accurate drawings. So what's the divergence? We take the partial derivative
of the x-component with respect to x. So that's just, there's only an
x-variable here, so we don't really have to worry about
keeping y or z constant. It's really just a derivative
of this expression with respect to x. So it's 2x minus 3. And then we add that to the
partial derivative of the y-component, or the y-function,
with respect to y. There's only y's in the
y-component, so we just take the derivative
with respect to y. So it's plus 2y minus 3. Or we could just say that the
divergence of v, at any point xy, so this is a function of x
and y, is 2x plus 2y minus 3. Now before I show you the
graph, let's analyze this function a little bit. First of all, let's just look
at the original vector field, and think about when does that
vector field have some interesting points? Well, I think some interesting
points are when either the x- or the y-components
are equal to 0. So when is the
x-component equal to 0? Well, if we factor the
x-component, that's the same thing as, we could
rewrite our vector field. If we just factored that,
that's x minus 1 times x minus 2i plus, and it's the same
polynomial, just with y, for the y-component, so y minus
1 times y minus 2 times j. So the x-component is 0 when x
is equal to 1, these are just the roots of this polynomial,
when x is equal to 1 or 2, right? And the y-component is 0
when y is equal to 1 or 2. And they're both equal to 0
if we have any combination of these points. So the points where they're
both equal to 0 are 1, 1, x's is 1, y is 2, right, because
then both components are 0, 2, 1, or 2, 2. So these are the points where
the magnitude of the velocity of our fluid, or the particles
of the fluid, are 0. And we'll see that on
our graph in a second. And let me ask
another question. At what points are, well, let's
first decide, what point is the divergence equal to 0? Let's say, at what point is
a divergence equal to 0. Let me click clear
up some space. I think I can delete this. We got our points, we figured
out what coordinates are the magnitude of the
vector field 0. So let's try to figure out,
when is the divergence equal to 0? So this is divergence. So if we set that equal
to 0, 2x plus 2y, 2x plus 2y, oh, sorry. You know what, this is 2x
minus 3 plus 2y minus 3. So this is minus 6, right? Minus 3 minus 3,
that's minus 6. That's my major flaw,
adding and subtracting. Anyway, so the divergence. 2x plus 2y, minus 6. And we want to know,
when does that equal 0? So let's set it equal to 0. And we can simplify
this a little bit. We can divide both sides of the
equation by 2, and you get x plus y minus 3 is equal to 0. You get x plus y is equal to 3. We could be finished there, or
we could just put it in our traditional mx plus b form,
that's the way I find it easier to visualize a line. We could say y is
equal to 3 minus x. So along this line, the
divergence of the vector fields b is equal to 0, along the line
y is equal to 3 minus x. And if we're above that line,
the divergence is going to be positive, right, because if you
just made this a greater than sign, that would carry over. You'd have y is
greater than 3-x. So y greater than 3-x, the
divergence is positive. And y is less than 3 minus x,
the divergence is negative. And you could just make this a
less than sign then solve, and you'll get y is less than 3-x,
you want to know when the divergence is negative. So I think we've done all of
the analyzing we can do. So let's take a look at the
graph and see if it if it's consistent with our intuition
of what a divergence is, and the numbers we found. I hope you can see this. So this is the vector field. I don't have space to show it,
but I think you remember, this is, you know, x squared
minus 3x plus 2. This is the definition
of our vector field. Have it graphed here. And we figured out, we just
figured out when the x-components and the
y-components are equal to 0, and then we said, when are
both of them equal to 0? And we said, oh, well
at the point 1, 1. Well, this is the point 1, 1,
and we that the magnitudes of the vectors are 0
at that point. And actually, I could
zoom in a little bit. Right around here, they're all
pointing inwards,, but they get smaller and smaller as you
approach the point 1, 1, right? We also said at the point
1, 2. x is 1, y is 2. And here, too, we see that
the magnitude of the vectors get very, very, very small. We could zoom in again. And we see, the magnitude
gets very small. The other point, 2, 1, once
again, we see the magnitude get small, and then 2, 2. So that's consistent with what
we found out, that the vector field gets very small
at this point. And the other interesting
thing we said, OK, when does the divergence equal 0? Well, the divergence equaled
0 along the line y is equal to 3 minus x. So the line y is equal to 3
minus x starts, the y-intercept is going to be 3, and it's
going to come down like this. Right? So anything along, at any
point along that line, the divergence is 0. And if we actually look at
the graph, it makes sense. Because I can't draw on this
graph, but if we drew a circle right there, let's assume that
that's on that, the line y is equal to 3 minus x, we would
see that in a given amount of time, just as many particles
are entering through the top right as leaving through
the bottom left, right? A lot of entering through the
top right and a lot of leaving through the bottom left. And the vectors, though,
are about the same. And if we go to the bottom, if
we go here on the line, it looks like maybe there are less
entering, but there's also less leaving. I know it's hard to see, but
anywhere along the line, you see just as much
entering as leaving. And that's why the
divergence is 0. Now, let's look at some
of the other points. Up here, we figure the
diverge is positive. And does that make
[UNINTELLIGIBLE] an arbitrary point. If we were to draw a circle
around here, we see the vectors on the left-hand side of that
circle that you can't see, because I can't draw
on this graph. But actually, let's
just say the square. Let's say the square
is my region, right? This one right here. If that square is my region,
we see the vectors on the left-hand side are larger, than
factors leaving are larger than the vectors entering it, right? So if, in a given amount of
time, more is leaving than entering, then I'm becoming
less dense, or you could say that the particles
are diverging. And that makes sense, because
I have a positive divergence. And if we go here, where the
divergence is negative, let's pick an arbitrary spot. Let's say this
square right here. We see that the vectors
entering it, the magnitude of the vectors entering it, are
larger than the magnitude of the vectors exiting it. So in any given amount of time,
more is coming in than leaving. So it's getting denser,
or it's converging. So negative divergence, you can
view it as getting denser, or it's actually converging. Actually, something
interesting is happening at these two points. So we said that at the point
2, 1, we see that in the y-direction it's actually
converging, right? Above y is equal to 1, the
arrows are pointing down, and below it the arrows
are pointing up, right? So in the y-direction, we're
actually converging, or we have a negative divergence. Things are entering
any given spot. But in the x-direction, things
are getting pushed out, right? So the reason why the
divergence is 0 here, you might have particles entering above
and below a certain space, but you have just as many particles
exiting to the left and the right. So it's kind of like particles
are getting deflected out. So on a net basis, between both
dimensions, you have no increase or decrease in density
along that line y is equal to 3 minus x. And before I run out of time, I
just want to give you that core intuition again, of why the
divergence is positive, and why that means that things are
flowing out, when the rate of change is positive. So we said the
divergence is positive. Let's say at the spot, right? So it makes sense, if our
partial derivatives are positive, that means that the
magnitude of our vector is getting larger and larger for
larger values of our x's and y's, right? So if the magnitude of our
vectors are getting larger and larger for larger values of x
and y, the vectors on the right are going to have
a larger magnitude than the factors on the left. They're increasing
in magnitude. And so if I were to draw a
boundary, more is going to be coming out of the right
than entering to the left. And so you have a positive
diverge, or you're getting less dense. Anyway, I hope I haven't
confused you too much, but I have run out
of time once again. I'll see you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Curl 1 | Partial derivatives, gradient, divergence, curl | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Before I actually show you the
mechanics of what the curl of a vector field really is, let's
try to get a little bit of intuition. So here I've drawn, I'm going
to just draw a two-dimensional vector field. You can extrapolate to 3,
but when we're getting the intuition, it's
good to do it in 2. And so, let's see. I didn't even label
the x and y axis. This is x, this is y. So when y is relatively low,
our magnitude vector goes in the x direction, when it
increases a little bit, it gets a little bit longer. So as we can see, as our change
in the y-direction, as we go in the y-direction, the
x-component of our vectors get larger and larger. And maybe in the x-direction
they're constant, regardless of your level of x,
the magnitude stays. So for given y, the magnitude
of your x-component vector might stay the same. So I mean, this vector field
might look something like this. I'm just making up numbers. Maybe it's just, I don't
know, y squared i. So the magnitude of the
x-direction is just a function of your y-value. And as your y-values get bigger
and bigger, the magnitude in your x-direction will get
bigger and bigger, proportional to the square of the magnitude
of the y direction. But for any given x, it's
always going to be the same. It's only dependent on y. So here, even if we make
x larger, we still get the same magnitude. And remember, these are
just sample points on our vector field. But anyway. That's enough of just getting
the intuition behind that vector field. But let me ask you a question. If I were to, let's say that
this vector field shows the velocity of a fluid
at various points. And so you can view this, we're
looking down on a river, maybe. If I were to take a little twig
or something, and I were to place it in this fluid, so let
me place the twig right here. Let me draw my twig. So let's say I place a twig,
it's a funny-looking twig, but that's good enough. Let's say I place a
twig right there. What's going to
happen to the twig? Well, at this point on the
twig, the water's moving to the right, so it'll push this part
of the twig to the right. At the top of the twig, the
water is also moving to the right, maybe with a faster
velocity, but it's also going to push the top of the
twig to the right. But the top of the twig is
going to be being pushed to the right faster than the
bottom of the twig, right? So what's going to happen? The twig's going
to rotate, right? After, I don't know, some
period of time, the twig's going to look
something like this. The bottom will move a little
bit to the right, but the top will move a lot
more to the right. Right? And the whole thing would have
been shifted to the right. But it's going to
rotate a little bit. And maybe after a little bit
further, maybe it looks something like this. So you can see that because the
vectors increasing in a direction that is perpendicular
to our direction of motion, right? This fairly simple example,
all of the vectors point in the x-direction. But the magnitude of the
vectors increase, they increase perpendicular, they increase
in the y-dimension, right? And when this happens, when the
flow is going in the same direction, but it's going at a
different magnitude, you see that any object in it
will rotate, right? So let's think about that. So if the derivative, the
partial derivative, of this vector field with respect to y
is increasing or decreasing, if it's just changing, that means
as we increase in y, or as we decrease in y, the magnitude of
the x-component of our vectors, right, the x-direction
of our vectors changes. And so if you have a different
speed for different levels of y, as something moves in the
x-direction, it's going to be rotated, right? You could almost view it as if
there's a net torque on an object that sits in
the water here. And the ultimate would be, let
me draw another vector field, the ultimate would be if
I had this situation. Let me draw another
vector field. If I had this situation, where
maybe down here it's like this, then maybe it's like this, and
then maybe it gets really small, then maybe it switches
directions, up here, and then the vector field
goes like this. So you could imagine up here
that's going to the left, with a fairly large magnitude. So if you put a twig here, you
would definitely hopefully see that the twig, not only will it
not be shifted to the right, this side is going to be moved
to the left, this side is going to be the right, it's
going to be rotated. And you'll see that there's
a net torque on the twig. So what's the intuition there? All of a sudden, we care about
how much is the magnitude of a vector changing, not in its
direction of motion, like in the divergence example, but we
care how much is the magnitude of a vector changing as we go
perpendicular to its direction of motion. So when we learned about
dot and cross product, what did we learn? We learned that the dot product
of 2 vectors tells you how much 2 vectors move together, and
the cross product tells you how much the perpendicular, it's
kind of the multiplication of the perpendicular
components of a vector. So this might give you a little
intuition of what is the curl. Because the curl essentially
measures what is the rotational effect, or I guess you could
say, what is the curl of a vector field at a given point? And you can you
can visualize it. You put a twig there, what
would happen to the twig? If the twig rotates and there's
some curl, if the magnitude of the rotation is larger,
then the curl is larger. If it rotates in the other
direction, you'll have the negative direction of curl. And so just like what we did
with torque, we now care about the direction. Because we care whether it's
going counterclockwise or clockwise, so we're going to
end up with a vector quantity, right? So, and all of this should
hopefully start fitting together at this point. We've been dealing
with this Dell vector or this, you know, we
could call this abusive notation, but it kind of is
intuitive, although it really doesn't have any meaning when
I describe it like this. You can kind of write it as a
vector operator, and then it has a little bit more meeting. But this Dell operator, we use it
a bunch of times. You know, if the partial
derivative of something in the i-direction, plus the partial
derivative, something with respect to y in the
j-direction, plus the partial derivative, well, this is if we
do it in three dimensions with respect to z
in the k-direction. When we applied it to just a
scalar or vector field, you know, like a three-dimensional
function, we just multiplied this times that scalar
function, we got the gradient. When we took the dot product of
this with a vector field, we got the divergence of
the vector field. And this should be a
little bit intuitive to you, at this point. Because when we, you might want
to review our original videos where we compared the dot
product to the cross product. Because the dot product
was, how much do two vectors move together? So when you're taking this Dell
operator and dotting it with a vector field, you're saying,
how much is the vector field changing, right? All a derivative is, a partial
derivative or a normal derivative, it's just
a rate of change. Partial derivative with respect
to x is rate of change in the x-direction. So all you're saying is, when
you're taking a dot product, how much is my rate of
change increasing in my direction of movement? How much is my rate of change
in the y-direction increasing in the y-direction? And so it makes sense that it
helps us with divergence. Because remember, if this is a
vector, and then as we increase this in the x-direction, the
vectors increase, we took a little point, and we said, oh,
at this point we're going to have more leaving than
entering, so we have a positive divergence. But that makes sense, also,
because as you go in the x-direction, the magnitudes
of the vectors increase. Anyway, I don't want to
confuse you too much. So now, the intuition, because
now we don't care about the rate of change along with the
direction of the vector. We care about the rate of
change of the magnitudes of the vectors perpendicular
the direction of the vector. So the curl, you might guess,
is equal to the cross product of our Dell operator
and the vector field. And if that was where your
intuition led you, and that is what your guess is,
you would be correct. That is the curl of
the vector field. And it is a measure of how much
is that field rotating, or maybe if you imagine an object
in the field, how much is the field causing something
to rotate because it's exerting a net torque? Because at different points
in the object, you have a different magnitude of a
field in the same direction. Anyway, I don't want to
confuse you too much. Hopefully that example I
just showed you will make a little bit of sense. Anyway, I realize I've
already pushed 9 minutes. In the next video, I'll
actually compute curl, and maybe we'll try to draw
a couple more to hit the intuition home. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Curl 2 | Partial derivatives, gradient, divergence, curl | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. Hopefully you have a
little intuition now of what the curl is. Now let's actually compute it
because if your sole goal is to pass a test and not understand
the nature of the universe, which I think would be sad, but
if that is your goal you at least need to know how to
calculate these things. But it's even more fun when
you have the intuition. And then you'll hopefully
never forget it. We'll take the curl of a
fairly fancy vector field. One that I have trouble
visualizing but that we can mathematically chug through. So let's say our vector field
and I'll do a three dimensional vector field just to do a
fairly complicated example; I'm just going to make it up on the
fly so let's say in the x-direction the magnitude of
the field is, I don't know, let's say it's x squared, y,
sine, z, in the x-direction, plus I don't know let's
make it x, y squared, z in the j-direction, or
the y-direction. And in the z-direction, I don't
know, let's make it cosine of x times cosine of y,
in the z-direction. Now we said that you can view
the curl of this vector field and I have no intuition of
what this vector field looks like; I just made this up. Maybe we'll graph it for fun
just to see how messed up it looks but we said this curl,
you could view it as a cross product of our del operator
and the vector field. Well, when you were using this
engineering notation, when you have a vector broken down into
it x, y, and z components, or it's i, j, and k components,
you can take the determinant of that matrix when I showed you
how to compute the cross product to figure out
the cross product. So how do we do this? So the cross product is going
to be equal to I didn't have to draw a straight line so
how you take the cross product of this vector field and
the gradient operator? Well, you write i, j, k on top
like you're taking the cross product of any two three
dimensional vectors, and then you take the first vector but
it's really a vector operator, but it's this del operator. And what are the components
of the del operator? It's the partial derivative
with respect to x, the partial derivative with respect to y,
partial derivative with respect to z, right? Let me just rewrite
the del operator. You can view it as being equal
to the partial with respect to x, i plus the partial with
respect to y, j plus the partial with respect to z, k. So its x, y, and z components
are the partials with respect to x, with respect to
y, with respect to z. And then the second, where
we're taking this operator cross the vector field. So what are the components
of the vector field? I'll probably run out of space,
but it's x squared, y, sine, z. Then here it's xy squared, z
I should written all of this bigger and then the third
column, the z component is cosine of x times cosine of y. Just the x, y, and
z components. And now we are ready to take
the determinant, which will probably, well, it'll
probably get pretty messy, but let's try it. So this is equal to the i-unit
vector let me use a more vibrant color the i-unit
vector times it's subdeterminant. So you cross out it's row and
column, and so you take the determinant of this expression,
so it's going to be times this times this, but it's
really the partial. If you multiply the partial
with respect to y operator times that expression, you're
really just taking, since it's an operator and not an
expression, you're really just going to take the partial of
this with respect to y, but I'll write it down. So it's going to be the partial
with respect to y of cosine x, cosine y minus the partial with
respect to z times xy squared, z and now we're on to
our j component plus j. So now what's the magnitude of
our curl in the j-direction? Let's cross out the row
in the column of j. So it's a partial with
respect to x of this. So this is maybe messier
than I originally intended. Cosine of x, cosine of y, cross
these columns there, minus the partial with respect to z
of x squared, y sine of z. And then finally
our k component. Oh, and sorry, when you take
the determinant, you use that and this is all kind of a bit
of voodoo but you put a plus here, a minus here, a plus
here, so it's kind of this checkered pattern. To this is plus i, this
should actually be minus j. Don't want to make that
mistake; this is minus j. This is just kind of the
algorithm of how do you take a determinant. OK, then finally we have plus
k times the determinant of its submatrix. So the partial with respect to
x of this, sorry, we take out it's row and column, so xy
squared, z minus the partial with respect to y of this. Why don't we take this row and
columns, and this is the submatrix of x squared,
y, sine of z. All right, now let me try
to simplify it, and I'll have to get some space. Hopefully you understood what I
did here and now we got this. And now I think I can erase
all of this and just so I can have some room to
simplify things in. No, that's not what I wanted
to do; I wanted to do it in a darker color. That's what I wanted to do. Erase that. Erase that. Now we just have to simplify
it, taking a bunch of partial derivatives. What's the partial derivative
of this with respect to y? Well, x is just a constant, so
it's going to be well, we can just put the i out front, but
eventually we want to write our magnitude before the vector
so it's i times the partial of this with respect to
y with our constant. Cosine of x is just a constant. And then what's the derivative
of this with respect to y? It's minus sine of y. So we'll write sine of y, and
let's put the minus out front; these are what's multiplied. OK, and then we have minus, now
we stick the partial with respect sorry, actually,
I forgot to do this part. Let me start over, actually. So let me just take this
expression and I'll multiply it by i. The partial of this with
respect to y is cosine of x times minus sine of y let's
put the minus out front minus sine of y. Now minus the partial of
this with respect to z. Well the partial of this with
respect to z, xy squared is just a constant, right? So the partial of this
with respect to z is just xy squared. So minus xy squared, and then
we're going to have all of that; that's the magnitude
in our i-direction. And now we have minus because
minus in the j-direction what's the partial derivative
of this with respect to x? Well, the partial of cosine
of x with respect to x is minus sine of x. And cosine of y is just
a constant, so it just carries over, cosine of y. And then that should be oh,
there we go minus this expression, the partial of
this with respect to z. Well, the derivative of
sine of z with respect to z is cosine of z. This is just a constant,
so it's minus x squared, y, cosine of z. And that's the magnitude
in the j-direction. We're almost there. And now finally, plus,
what's the partial of this with respect to x? Well, these are just constants,
so it's y squared, z minus once again, we just have a y
term; everything else is a constant so the partial
with respect to y is x squared, sine of z. And that's the magnitude
in our k-direction. And we're pretty much done. I mean we can simplify
it a little bit just to make it clean. And essentially we could just,
I don't have to rewrite it, we can just multiply
this by negative 1. So then this becomes
plus, plus, plus. Yeah, that's pretty much it. This is the curl of the
vector field v at any point x, y, and z. So that's how you calculate it. You just literally take the
cross product of that del operator and your vector field. And you'll get something fairly
hairy, although this was, I think, a hairier than
average problem. In the next video, we'll do a
little bit of this, but I think it'll give you more intuition
and less of just the algorithm and the computation
of how do you do it. So you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Curl 3 | Partial derivatives, gradient, divergence, curl | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say I have the
vector field v. The vector at any given point
is equal to minus or the magnitude of my x direction
is actually dependent on y. So where we are in the y
coordinate and the xy plane. Plus and then my magnitude
in the y direction is dependent on x. Fair enough. So first, let's just
chuck through this, and figure out it's curl. So the curl of v. It is equal to our del
vector operator, cross v. Which is nothing but this. And even though this looks like
a two dimensional vector field, we actually have to take the
cross product in 3 dimensions. Because a curl is just like
torque, and when you like we did the right hand rule when we
studied well, I hope you watched some of the videos on
magnetism and torque but the torque actually goes in a
direction that is perpendicular to both of the vectors
in your cross product. If both of these only have x
and y components, your actual result is going to be
in the z direction. It's going to be perpendicular
to both of these vectors. So when you take the cross
product, you still have to do it in 3 dimensions. So i j k, partial with respect
to x, partial with respect to y, partial with respect to z. The x component is minus y. The j component is x. And we have no k component. This one should be a little
bit cleaner to calculate than the last example. So this is going to be equal
to well, see the i component let's cross out
its column and its row. So it's going to be the partial
with respect to y of 0 minus the partial with
respect to z of x. Minus that. And all of that times i
minus and now it's going to be the j component. Remember, you do
plus minus plus. So minus and this is
the j component. Cross out its row and column,
the partial derivative of x with respect to 0. Or partial derivative of 0
with respect to x, actually. Minus the partial
derivative of z. Or the partial derivative
of the [? vector ?] z of minus y. That's its j component. And finally, plus
its k component. Row and column. So the partial derivative with
respect to x minus the partial derivative of y with
respect to minus y. And I know you can't read it,
but that's that minus y there, and that's the k component. And now let's simplify it. I'll simplify it above it. So this term let's see,
partial derivative of 0. Well, that's 0. Partial derivative of
x with respect to z. Well, as far as z's concerned,
x is a constant, so that's 0. Partial derivative of 0
with respect to x, 0. Partial derivative of minus
y with respect to z. As far as z's concerned,
y is also constant. So that's 0. So all we're left is
with this last term. That was pretty
straightforward. Why don't we just cross
all of that out? And that makes intuitive
sense, too, right? Because at least from x's point
of view, the rotation is although, the rotation, if you
think about it, is going to be in the direction perpendicular
to both the x direction and perpendicular to the direction
in which it is changing. You could kind of view it
orthogonally, to its direction of motion, which is y. So it would be the z direction. If that confuses you,
don't worry about it. But if it doesn't, then
you could apply the same argument to the j vector. But anyway, lets simplify this. So this is equal to the
partial derivative of x with respect to x. Well, that's just 1. Minus the partial derivative
of y of minus y with respect to y. Well, that's just minus 1. So it equals 2. So the curl, at any point of
this vector field, is 2. Let's see what this vector
field looks like, and let's see if that gives us if
our intuition holds in this example. And let me try to make
it a little bit bigger. Make the window bigger. There you go. Well, I think it's clear, you
know, right when you look at it, that this vector field
looks like it's spinning. If you were to stick something,
especially in the middle, it's very clear that it would spin. But what might be a little
unintuitive you might think, wow, well, wouldn't something
spin faster near the center than it would here? Why is the you know,
the curl we got is 2. It's a constant. The curl is the same throughout
this entire vector field. So you'll be like, whoa, that's
kind of implying that the field is making something spin
equally, no matter where you are in the field. Let's see if that makes sense. Well, in the middle, it
definitely makes sense that something is spinning. If I had a little stick here,
I'd be pushing in this direction, with not that much
of a magnitude in that direction. And then I'd be pushing down to
the right in this direction, so it would cause it to spin. But what if I had that
same stick here? You'd say, well, on the
top right I'm pushing up, up and to the left. And the bottom left, I'm also
pushing up and to the left. You know, it wouldn't
spin as much. But it would. Because the difference in
magnitudes of these 2 you could almost view them as the
torque producing forces the difference in magnitude is
enough that you'd still have the same counterclockwise
rotation here as you would have here. So because the curl is a
constant positive number, when we look at the xy plane like
this, if you put a twig that same twig anywhere where you
put it on this plane it'll have the same
counterclockwise rotation. I think that's pretty neat. Now let's do a
little experiment. What would have happened
if this was plus y. So let's just do
that experiment. If this was plus y then this
would have been plus y, then this final term we would have
taken the partial derivative with respect to y of plus y
and so this would have been 1 minus plus 1. And then our curl
would have been 0. Which would have meant that we
would have had no rotation. And what's the
intuition of that? Well, if we just look at it
mathematically, if we have 0 curl, somehow, the rotation in
our x direction must be being offset by a rotation
in the y direction. That the torques must
be just perfectly offsetting each other. Let's see what happens
if I were to change. So this was our old graph. Let me actually change it
to my new vector field. So that's our new vector field. This is our vector
field plus yi plus xj. And now the curl
is 0 everywhere. Which implies, or which means,
that I could put a twig anywhere here and I'm not going
to get any kind of rotation. Let's see if that makes sense. If I put a twig in the center,
or some kind of stick in the center, let's see. I would have the forces or the
fluids pushing in in this direction, but they're not
helping to rotate, and pushing out in that direction. Well, that's not going
to help me either. So I'm definitely not
going to rotate there. And actually, you could
put a twig anywhere. And maybe a twig might be
pushed in a direction. For example, if I put a twig
here, it's going to be pushed outward by the flow of the
water, by the velocity of the water. But it's not going to rotate. So the [? ink ?] kind of holds. That's even though I kind of
have curl in the x direction, or I have curl in the
y direction, they're offsetting each other. So that in 2 dimensions,
I actually end up having no rotation. And actually, this is called an
irrotational I think that's the word vector field. Where you're not going to
have any rotation here. All of the if you think of it
as force or velocity of the vector field is going to be
applying translation to objects in that field. And actually, just for fun,
let's think about the divergence of that field. Just to, I don't know. Just because I have 2 minutes. So if I were to think about the
divergence of that field, it's fairly easy to calculate. Let me erase this real fast. It's always fun to just
interpret a vector field to death. Let's do the divergence
of this one. So the divergence of that
vector field, is just a partial derivative of
this with respect to x. So div of v is the same thing
as our del operator dot our vector field, v. And that's the partial
derivative of this with respect to x. Well, the partial derivative of
y with respect to x is just 0. Plus the partial derivative
of x with respect to y. So this is 0. So the divergence of
this field is 0. And even in the other case,
when this was a minus, it still would have been 0. And does that make sense? Well, if we take a circle
anywhere here let's take it in the center, because the
center's the most interesting. Let's take a circle. So we do have some fluid or
particles coming in at a certain velocity from the
bottom right and the top left. But just as much is coming
out through the top right and the bottom left. Whatever's coming in through
here and here is leaving through there and there. So if I had an infinitesimally
small circle, or sphere, in this vector field, I would have
no net density increasing. Or nothing would be entering
into that circle, or in any given amount of time the
concentration of that circle wouldn't change. And that's true pretty
much anywhere. If I were to draw a circle
here, because the divergence is 0, it's telling us that
whatever's coming in in 1 direction is coming out
in the other directions. So I'm not getting any
denser, or any less dense. I have no divergence
or convergence. So that's just interesting. Well, now I've run of time. So we're done analyzing
this vector field. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: Double integral 1 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
So far, we've used integrals
to figure out the area under a curve. And let's just review a little
bit of the intuition, although this should hopefully be second
nature to you at this point. If it's not, you might want
to review the definite integration videos. But if I have some function
this is the xy plane, that's the x-axis, that's the y-axis
and I have some function. Let's call that, you know,
this is y is equal to some function of x. Give me an x and
I'll give you a y. If I wanted to figure out the
area under this curve, between, let's say, x is equal to
a and x is equal to b. So this is the area I
want to figure out. What I do is, I split it up
into a bunch of columns or a bunch of rectangles. Where let me draw one of
those rectangles where you could view and there's
different ways to do this, but this is just a review. Where you could review that's
maybe 1 of the rectangles. Well, the area of the
rectangle is just base times height, right? Well, we're going to make these
rectangles really skinny and just sum up an infinite
number of them. So we want to make them
infinitely small. But let's just call the
base of this rectangle dx. And then the height of this
rectangle is going to be f of x, at that point. It's going to be f of if this
is x0, or whatever, you can just call it f of x, right? That's the height
of that rectangle. And if we wanted to take
the sum of all of these rectangles right? There's just going to
be a bunch of them. One there, one there. Then we'll get the area, and if
we have infinite number of these rectangles, and they're
infinitely skinny, we have exactly the area
under that curve. That's the intuition behind
the definite integral. And the way we write that
it's the definite integral. We're going to take the sums of
these rectangles, from x is equal to a, to x is equal to b. And the sum, or the areas that
we're summing up, are going to be the height is f of x,
and the width is d of x. It's going to be f
of x times d of x. This is equal to the
area under the curve. f of x, y is equal to f
of x, from x is equal to a to x is equal to b. And that's just a
little bit of review. But hopefully, you'll now
see the parallel of how we extend this to taking the
volume under a surface. So first of all,
what is a surface? Well, if we're thinking
in three dimensions, a surface is going to be
a function of x and y. So we can write a surface as,
instead of y is a function of f and x I'm sorry. Instead of saying that y is a
function of x, we can write a surface as z is equal to
a function of x and y. So you can kind of view
it as the domain. Right? The domain is all of the set
of valid things that you can input into a function. So now, before, our domain was
just at least, you know, for most of what we dealt with
was just the x-axis, or kind of the real number line
in the x direction. Now our domain is the xy plane. We can give any x and any y
and we'll just deal with the reals right now, I don't
want to get too technical. And then it'll pop out another
number, and if we wanted to graph it, it'll be our height. And so that could be the
height of a surface. So let me just show you what
a surface looks like, in case you don't remember. And we'll actually figure out
the volume under this surface. So this is a surface. I'll tell you its function
in a second, but it's pretty neat to look at. But as you can see,
it's a server. It's like a piece of
paper that's bent. Let's see, let me rotate it
to its traditional form. So this is the x direction,
this is the y direction. And the height is a function of
where we are in the xy plane. So how do we figure out
the volume under a surface like this? How do we figure
out the volume? It seems like a bit of a
stretch, given what we've learned from this. But what if and I'm just
going to draw an abstract surface here let
me draw some axis. Let's see, that's my x-axis. That's my y-axis. That's my z-axis. I don't practice these videos
ahead of time, so I'm often wondering what I'm
about to draw. OK. So that's x, that's
y, and that's z. And let's say I
have some surface. I'll just draw something. I don't know what it is. Some surface. This is our surface. z is a function of x and y. So, for example, you give me a
coordinate in the xy plane. Say, here, I'll put it into
the function and it'll give us a z value now. And I'll plot it there
and it'll be a point on the surface. So what we want to figure
out is the volume under the surface. And we have to specify
bounds, right? From here, we said x is equal
to a, to x is equal to b. So let's make a square
bound first, because this keeps it a lot simpler. So let's say that the domain or
the region not the domain the region of the x and y
region of this part of the surface under which we want
to calculate the volume. Let's say, the shadow if
the sun was right above the surface, the shadow
would be right there. Let me try my best to
draw this neatly. So this is what we're
going to try to figure out the volume of. And let's say so, if we
wanted to draw it in the xy plane, like you can kind of
view the projection of the surface of the xy plane,
or the shadow of the surface of the xy plane. What are the bounds? You can almost view what are
the bounds of the domain? Well, let's say that this
point let's say that this right here, that's 0,
0 in the xy plane. Let's say that this is y is
equal to I don't know, that's y is equal to a. That's this line right here. Y is equal to a. And let's say that this line
right here is x is equal to b. Hope you get that, right? This is the xy plane. If we have a constant x, it
would be a line like that. A constant y, a line like that. And then we have the
area in between it. So how do we figure out
the volume under this? Well, if I just wanted to
figure out the area of let's just say, this sliver. Let's say we had a
well, actually let me go the other way. Let's say we had a constant y. So let's say I had some sliver. I don't want to confuse you. Let's say that I had
some constant y. I just want to give
you the intuition. You know, let's say. I don't know what that is. It's an arbitrary y. But for some constant y, what
if I could just figure out the area under the curve there? How would I figure out just
the area under that curve? It'll be a function of
which y I pick, right? Because if I pick a y here,
it'll be a different area. If I pick a y there, it'll
be a different area. But I could view this now
as a very similar problem to this one up here. I could have my dx's let
me pick a vibrant color so you can see it. Let's say that's dx, right? That's a change in x. And then the height is going
to be a function of the x I have and the y I picked. Although I'm assuming,
to some degree, that that's a constant y. So what would be the area
of this sheet of paper? It's kind of a constant y. It's part of it's a sheet
of paper within this volume, you can kind of view it. Well, it would be we said
the height of each of these rectangles is f of xy, right? That's the height. It depends which x and
y we pick down here. And then its width is
going to be d of x. Not d of x, dx. And then if we integrated it,
from x is equal to 0, which was back here, all the way to x
is equal to b, what would it look like? It would look like that.
x is going from 0 to b. Fair enough. And this would actually
give us a function of y. This would give us an
expression so that I would know the area of this kind of sliver
of the volume, for any given value of y. If you give me a y, I can tell
you the area of the sliver that corresponds to that y. Now what could I do? If I know the area of any given
sliver, what if I multiply the area of that sliver times dy? This is a dy. Let me do it in a
vibrant color. So dy, a very small
change in y. If I multiplied this area
times a small dy, then all of a sudden I have
a sliver of volume. Hopefully that
makes some sense. I'm making that that little
cut that I took the area of by making it three dimensional. So what would be the
volume of that sliver? The volume of that sliver will
be this function of y times dy, or this whole thing times dy. So it would be the integral
from 0 to b of f of xy dx. That gives us the area
of this blue sheet. Now if I multiply this
whole thing times dy, I get this volume. It gets some depth. This little area that I'm
shading right here gets depth of that sheet. Now if I added all of those
sheets that now have depth, if I took the infinite sum so if
I took the integral of this from my lower y bound from 0
to my upper y bound, a, then at least based on our intuition
here maybe I will have figured out the volume
under this surface. But anyway, I didn't
want to confuse you. But that's the intuition of
what we're going to do. And I think you're going to
find out that actually calculating the volumes are
pretty straightforward, especially when you have
fixed x and y bounds. And that's what we're going
to do in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Double integrals 2 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
You hopefully have a little
intuition now on what a double integral is or how we go about
figuring out the volume under a surface. So let's actually compute it
and I think it'll all become a lot more concrete. So let's say I have the
surface, z, and it's a function of x and y. And it equals xy squared. It's a surface in
three-dimensional space. And I want to know the
volume between this surface and the xy-plane. And the domain in the xy-plane
that I care about is x is greater than or equal to 0,
and less than or equal to 2. And y is greater than or
equal to 0, and less than or equal to 1. Let's see what that looks
like just so we have a good visualization of it. So I graphed it here and
we can rotate it around. This is z equals xy squared. This is the bounding box,
right? x goes from 0 to 2; y goes from 0 to 1. We literally want this you
could almost view it the volume well, not almost. Exactly view it as the
volume under this surface. Between this surface, the top
surface, and the xy-plane. And I'll rotate it around so
you can get a little bit better sense of the actual volume. Let me rotate. Now I should use the
mouse for this. So it's this space,
underneath here. It's like a makeshift
shelter or something. I could rotate it a little bit. Whatever's under this,
between the two surfaces that's the volume. Whoops, I've flipped it. There you go. So that's the volume
that we care about. Let's figure out how to do and
we'll try to gather a little bit of the intuition
as we go along. So I'm going to draw a not as
impressive version of that graph, but I think it'll
do the job for now. Let me draw my axes. That's my x-axis, that's my
y-axis, and that's my z-axis. x, y, z. x is going from 0 to 2. Let's say that's 2. y is going from 0 to 1. So we're taking the volume
above this rectangle in the xy-plane. And then the surface, I'm going
to try my best to draw it. I'll draw it in a
different color. I'm looking at the picture. At this end it looks
something like this. And then it has a
straight line. Let's see if I can draw this
surface going down like that. And then if I was really
good I could shade it. It looks something like this. If I were to shade it,
the surface looks something like that. And this right here
is above this. This is the bottom left corner,
you can almost view it. So let me just say the yellow
is the top of the surface. That's the top of the surface. And then this is
under the surface. So we care about this
volume underneath here. Let me show you the
actual surface. So this volume underneath here. I think you get the idea. So how do we do that? Well, in the last example we
said, well, let's pick an arbitrary y and for that
y, let's figure out the area under the curve. So if we fix some y when you
actually do the problem, you don't have to think about it in
this much detail, but I want to give you the intuition. So if we pick just an
arbitrary y here. So on that y, we could think of
it if we have a fixed y, then the function of x and y you can
almost view it as a function of just x for that given y. And so, we're kind of figuring
out the value of this, of the area under this curve. You should view this as kind of
an up down curve for a given y. So if we know a y we can figure
out then for example, if y was 5, this function would
become z equals 25x. And then that's easy to
figure out the value of the curve under. So we'll make the value under
the curve as a function of y. We'll pretend like
it's just a constant. So let's do that. So if we have a dx
that's our change in x. And then our height of each of
our rectangles is going to be a function it's going to be z. The height is z, which is
a function of x and y. So we can take the integral. So the area of each of these is
going to be our function, xy squared I'll do it here
because I'll run out of space. xy squared times the
width, which is dx. And if we want the area of this
slice for a given y, we just integrate along the x-axis. We're going to integrate
from x is equal to 0 to x is equal to 2. From x is equal to 0 to 2. Fair enough. Now, but we just don't want to
figure out the area under the curve at one slice, for one
particular y, we want to figure out the entire
area of the curve. So what we do is
we say, OK, fine. The area under the curve, not
the surface under this curve for a particular y,
is this expression. Well, what if I gave it
a little bit of depth? If I multiplied this area times
dy then it would give me a little bit of depth, right? We'd kind of have a
three-dimensional slice of the volume that we care about. I know it's hard to imagine. Let me bring that here. So if I had a slice here, we
just figured out the area of a slice and then I'm multiplying
it by dy to give it a little bit of depth. So you multiply it by dy to
give it a little bit of depth, and then if we want the entire
volume under the curve we add all the dy's together, take the
infinite sum of these infinitely small
volumes really now. And so we will integrate
from y is equal to 0 to y is equal to 1. I know this graph is a little
hard to understand, but you might want to re-watch
the first video. I had a slightly easier
to understand surface. So now, how do we
evaluate this? Well, like we said,
you evaluate from the inside and go outward. It's taking a partial
derivative in reverse. So we're integrating here with
respect to x, so we can treat y just like a constant. Like it's like the number
5 or something like that. So it really doesn't
change the integral. So what's the antiderivative
of xy squared? Well, the antiderivative of
xy squared I want to make sure I'm color consistent. Well, the antiderivative
of x is x to the 1/2 sorry. x squared over 2. And then y squared is
just a constant, right? And then we don't have to
worry about plus c since this is a definite integral. And we're going to
evaluate that at 2 and 0. And then we still have
the outside integral with respect to y. So once we figure that out
we're going to integrate it from 0 to 1 with respect to dy. Now what does this evaluate? We put a 2 in here. If you put a 2 in there
you get 2 squared over 2. That's just 4 over 2. So it's 2 y squared. Minus 0 squared over
2 times y squared. Well, that's just
going to be 0. So it's minus 0. I won't write that down because
hopefully that's a little bit of second nature to you. We just evaluated this
at the 2 endpoints and I'm short for space. So this evaluated at 2y
squared and now we evaluate the outside integral. 0, 1 dy. And this is an important
thing to realize. When we evaluated this
inside integral, remember what we were doing? We were trying to figure out
for a given y, what the area of this surface was. Well, not this surface, the
area under the surface for a given y. For a given y that surface
kind of turns into a curve. And we tried to figure out
the area under that curve in the traditional sense. This ended up being
a function of y. And that makes sense because
depending on which y we pick we're going to get a
different area here. Obviously, depending on which y
we pick, the area kind of a wall dropped straight down
that area's going to change. So we got a function of y when
we evaluated this and now we just integrate with respect to
y and this is just plain old vanilla definite integration. What's the antiderivative
of 2y squared? Well, that equals 2 times
y to the third over 3, or 2/3 y to the third. We're going to evaluate
that at 1 and 0, which is equal to let's see. 1 to the third times 2/3. That's 2/3. Minus 0 to the third times 2/3. Well, that's just 0. So it equals 2/3. If our units were meters
these would be 2/3 meters cubed or cubic meters. But there you go. That's how you evaluate
a double integral. There really isn't
a new skill here. You just have to make sure to
keep track of the variables. Treat them constant. They need to be treated
constant, and then treat them as a variable of integration
when it's appropriate. Anyway, I will see you
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Double integrals 3 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last a video we figured
out the volume between this surface, which was xy squared
and the xy-plane when x went from 0 to 2 and y
went from 0 to 1. And the way we did it
is we integrated with respect to x first. We said, pick a y, and
let's just figure out the area under the curve. And so we integrated with
respect to x first, and then we integrated with respect to y. But we could have done it
the other way around. So let's do that and just make
sure we got the right answer. So let me erase a lot of this. So remember, our answer was 2/3
when we integrated with respect to x first, and then
with respect to y. But I will show you that we can
integrate the other way around. That's good when you can
get the same answer in two different ways. So let me redraw that graph
because I want to give you the intuition again. So that's my x-axis,
y-axis, z-axis. x, y, z. Then this is my xy-plane. down here. y goes from 0 to 1; x goes from
0 to 2, This is x equals 1, this is equals 2, this is y
equals 1, and then the graph I will do my best to draw it. Looks something let me get
some contrast going here. So the graph looks
something like this. Let me see if I can draw it. On this side it looks something
like that and then it comes down like that, straight. And then, the volume
we care about. It's actually this volume
underneath the graph. This is the top of the
surface on that side. We care about this volume
underneath the surface. And then when we draw the
bottom of the surface let me do it in a darker color
looks something like this. This is the bottom
underneath the surface. I can even shade it a little
bit just to show you that it's the underneath. Hopefully that's a
decent rendering of it. Let's look back at
what we had before. It's like a page that I just
flipped up at this point, and we care about this volume,
kind of the colored area under there. So let's figure
out how to do it. Last time we integrated
with respect to x first. Let's integrate with
respect to y first. So let's hold x constant. So if we hold x constant what
we could do is for a given x let's pick an x. So if we pick a given x,
let's pick the x here. Then what we can do, for a
given x, you can view that function of x and y. If x is a constant, let's say
if x is 1 then z is just equal to y squared. That's easy to figure out the
area under because we can see that x isn't the constant, but
we can treat it as a constant. So for example, for any
given x, we would have a curve like this. What we could do is we could
try to figure out the area of this curve first. So how do we do that? Well, we just said, we could
kind of view this function up here as z is equal to xy
squared because that's exactly what it is. But we're holding x constant. We're treating it
like a constant. To figure out that area we
could take a dy, a change in y, multiply it by the
height, which is xy squared. So we take xy squared, multiply
it by dy, and then if we want this entire area we integrate
it from y is equal to 0 to y is equal to 1. Fair enough. Now once we have that area, if
you want the volume underneath this entire surface what we
could do is we can multiply this area times dx and
get some depth going. Let me pick a nice
color, that's green. So that's our dx. So if we multiply that times
dx we would get some depth. Let me do a darker color,
get some contrast. Sometimes I feel like that
guy who paints on PBS. So now we have the volume of
this, you kind of view it the area under the curve times a
dx, so we have some depth here. So it's time dx. And if we want to figure out
the entire volume under this surface between the surface
and the xy-plane given this constraint to our domain we
just integrate from x is equal to 0 to 2. All right, so let's
think about it. This area in green here
that we started with, that should be a function of x. We held x constant, but
depending on which x you pick this area is going to change. So when we evaluate this
magenta inner integral with respect to y we should
get a function of x. And then when you evaluate
the whole thing we'll get our volumes. So let's do it. Let's evaluate this
inner integral. Hold x constant. What's the antiderivative
of y squared? It's y of the third over 3. The x is a constant, right? We're going to evaluate
that at 1 and at 0. The outer integral is still
with respect to x dx. This is equal to let's see. When you evaluate y is equal
to 1 you get 1 to the third. That's 1. So it's x/3 minus when
y is 0 then that whole thing just becomes 0. This purple expression
is just x/3. And then we still have
the outside integral from 0 to 2 dx. So given what x we have, the
area of this green surface that was where we started. Given any given x, that
area I wanted something with some contrast. This area is x/3 depending
on which x you pick. If x is 1, this area
right here is 1/3. But now we're going to
integrate underneath the entire surface and get our volume. And like I said, when
you integrate it, it's a function of x. So let's do that. And this is just plain old
vanilla, standard integral. So what's the
antiderivative of x? It's x squared over 2. We have a 1/3 there so
it equals x squared over 2 times 3. So x squared over 6. And we're going to evaluate
it at 2 and at 0. 2 squared over 6 is 4/6. Minus 0/6, which is equal to 0. Equals 4/6. What is 4/6? Well, that's just the
same thing as 2/3. So the volume under the surface
is 2/3, and if you watched the previous video you will
appreciate the fact that when we integrated the other way
around, when we did it with respect to x first and then y,
we got the exact same answer. So the universe is in
proper working order. And I've surprisingly,
actually finished this video with extra time. So for fun, we can just spin
this graph and just appreciate the fact that we have figured
out the volume between this surface, xy squared
and the xy-plane. Pretty neat. Anyway, I'll see you
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Double integrals 4 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
I think it's very important to
have as many ways as possible to view a certain type of
problem, so I want to introduce you to a different way. Some people might have taught
this first, but the way I taught it in the first integral
video is kind of the way that I always think about when
I do the problems. But sometimes, it's more useful
to think about it the way I'm about to show you, and maybe
you won't see the difference, or maybe you'll say, oh, Sal,
those are just the exact same thing. Someone actually emailed me and
told me that I should make it so I can scroll things, and I
said, oh, that's not too hard to do. So I just did that, and
I scrolled my drawing. But anyway, let's say we have
a surface in 3 dimensions. It's a function of x and y. You give me a coordinate down
here, and I'll tell you how high the surface
is at that point. And we want to figure out the
volume under that surface. So. We can very easily figure out
the volume of a very small column underneath the surface. So this whole volume is what
we're trying to figure out, right, between the
dotted lines. I think you can see it. You have some experience
visualizing this right now. So let's say that I have
a little area here. We could call that da. Let me see if I can draw this. Let's say we have a little
area down here, a little square in the x-y plane. And it's, depending on how you
view it, this side of it is dx, its length is dx, and the
height, you could say, on that side, is dy. Right? Because it's a little small
change in y there, and it's a little small change in x here. And its area, the area of
this little square, is going to be dx times dy. And if we wanted to figure out
the volume of the solid between this little area and the
surface, we could just multiply this area times the function. Right? Because the height at this
point is going to be the value of the function,
roughly, at this point. Right? This is going to be an
approximation, and then we're going to take an infinite sum. I think you know
where this is going. But let me do that. Let me at least draw the little
column that I want to show you. So that's one end of it, that's
another end of it, that's the front end of it, that's
the other end of it. So we have a little figure that
looks something like that. A little column, right? It intersects the
top of the surface. And the volume of this
column, not too difficult. It's going to be this little
area down here, which is, we could call that da. Sometimes written
like that. da. It's a little area. And we're going to multiply
that area times the height of this column, and that's the
function at that point. So it's f of x and y. And of course, we could have
also written it as, this da is just dx times
dy, or dy times dx. I'm going to write it in
every different way. So we could also have
written this as f of xy times dx times dy. And of course, since
multiplication is associative, I could have also written it as
f of xy times dy dx. These are all equivalent, and
these all represent the volume of this column, that's the
between this little area here and the surface. So now, if we wanted to figure
out the volume of the entire surface, we have a couple
of things we could do. We could add up all of the
volumes in the x-direction, between the lower x-bound and
the upper x-bound, and then we'd have kind of a thin sheet,
although it will already have some depth, because we're
not adding up just the x's. There's also a dy back there. So we would have a volume of a
figure that would extend from the lower x all the way to the
upper x, go back dy, and come back here. If we wanted to sum
up all the dx's. And if we wanted to do that,
which expression would we use? Well, we would be summing with
respect to x first, so we could use this expression, right? And actually, we could
write it here, but it just becomes confusing. If we're summing with respect
to x, but we have the dy written here first. It's really not incorrect, but
it just becomes a little ambiguous, are we summing
with respect to x or y. But here, we could say, OK. If we want to sum up all the
dx's first, let's do that. We're taking the sum with
respect to x, and let me, I'm going to write down the actual,
normally I just write numbers here, but I'm going to say,
well, the lower bound here is x is equal to a, and the upper
bound here is x is equal to b. And that'll give us the volume
of, you could imagine a sheet with depth, right? The sheet is going to be
parallel to the x-axis, right? And then once we have that
sheet, in my video, I think that's the newspaper people
trying to sell me something. Anyway. So once we have the sheet, I'll
try to draw it here, too, I don't want to get this picture
too muddied up, but once we have that sheet, then we can
integrate those, we can add up the dy's, right? Because this width right
here is still dy. We could add up of all the
different dy's, and we would have the volume
of the whole figure. So once we take this sum,
then we could take this sum. Where y is going from it's
bottom, which we said with c, from y is equal to c to y's
upper bound, to y is equal to d. Fair enough. And then, once we evaluate
this whole thing, we have the volume of this solid, or the
volume under the surface. Now we could have
gone the other way. I know this gets a little
bit messy, but I think you get what I'm saying. Let's start with that little
da we had originally. Instead of going this way,
instead of summing up the dx's and getting this sheet, let's
sum up the dy's first, right? So we could take, we're summing
in the y-direction first. We would get a sheet that's
parallel to the y-axis, now. So the top of the sheet would
look something like that. So if we're coming the dy's
first, we would take the sum, we would take the integral with
respect to y, and it would be, the lower bound would be y is
equal to c, and the upper bound is y is equal to d. And then we would have that
sheet with a little depth, the depth is dx, and then we could
take the sum of all of those, sorry, my throat is dry. I just had a bunch of almonds
to get power to be able to record these videos. But once I have one of these
sheets, and if I want to sum up all of the x's, then I could
take the infinite sum of infinitely small columns, or in
this view, sheets, infinitely small depths, and the lower
bound is x is equal to a, and the upper bound is
x is equal to b. And once again, I would have
the volume of the figure. And all I showed you here is
that there's two ways of doing the order of integration. Now, another way of saying
this, if this little original square was da, and this is a
shorthand that you'll see all the time, especially in
physics textbooks, is that we are integrating along
the domain, right? Because the x-y plane
here is our domain. So we're going to do a double
integral, a two-dimensional integral, we're saying that the
domain here is two-dimensional, and we're going to take that
over f of x and y times da. And the reason why I want to
show you this, is you see this in physics books all the time. I don't think it's a
great thing to do. Because it is a shorthand, and
maybe it looks simpler, but for me, whenever I see something
that I don't know how to compute or that's not obvious
for me to know how to compute, it actually is more confusing. So I wanted to just show you
that what you see in this physics book, when someone
writes this, it's the exact same thing as this or this. The da could either be dx times
dy, or it could either be dy times dx, and when they do this
double integral over domain, that's the same thing is just
adding up all of these squares. Where we do it here, we're
very ordered about it, right? We go in the x-direction, and
then we add all of those up in the y-direction, and we
get the entire volume. Or we could go the
other way around. When we say that we're just
taking the double integral, first of all, that tells us
we're doing it in two dimensions, over a domain,
that leaves it a little bit ambiguous in terms of
how we're going to sum up all of the da's. And they do it intentionally in
physics books, because you don't have to do it using
Cartesian coordinates, using x's and y's. You can do it in polar
coordinates, you could do it a ton of different ways. But I just wanted to show
you, this is another way to having an intuition of the
volume under a surface. And these are the exact same
things as this type of notation that you might
see in a physics book. Sometimes they won't write
a domain, sometimes they'd write over a surface. And we'll later do
those integrals. Here the surface is easy, it's
a flat plane, but sometimes it'll end up being a curve
or something like that. But anyway, I'm
almost out of time. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Double integrals 5 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In all of the double
integrals we've done so far, the boundaries on
x and y were fixed. Now we'll see what happens
when the boundaries on x and y are variables. So let's say I have the same
surface, and I'm not going to draw it the way it looks, I'll
just kind of draw it figuratively. But the problem we're actually
going to do is z, and this is the exact same one we've
been doing all along. The point of here isn't to show
you how to integrate, the point of here is to show you how
to visualize and think about these problems. And frankly, in double integral
problems the hardest part is figuring out the boundaries. Once you do that, the
integration is pretty straightforward. It's really not any harder then
single variable integration. So let's say that's our
surface: z is equal to xy squared. Let me draw the axes again. So that's my x-axis. That's my z-axis. That's my y-axis. x, y, and z. And you saw what this graph
looked like several videos ago. I took out the whole grapher
and we rotated and things. I'm not going to draw the graph
the way it looks; I'm just going to brought fairly
abstractly as just an abstract surface. Because the point here it's
really to figure out the boundaries of integration. Before I actually even draw
the surface, I'm going to draw the boundary. The first time we did this
problem we said, OK, x goes from 0 to 2, y goes from 0 to
1, and then we figured out the volume above that
bounded domain. Now let's do something else. Let's say that x
goes from 0 to 1. And let's say that the volume
that we want to figure out under the surface, it's not
from a fixed y to an upper-bound y. I'll show you: it's
actually a curve. So this is all on the xy plane,
everything I'm drawing here. And this curve, we could view
it two ways: we could say y is a function of x, y is
equal to x squared. Or we could write is equal
to square root of y. We don't have to write plus or
minus or anything like that because we're in the
first quadrant. So this is the area
above which we want to figure out the volume. Let me, yeah, it doesn't hurt
to color it in just so we can really hone in on
what we care about. So that's the area
above which we want to figure out the volume. You could kind of say,
that's our bounded domain. And so x goes from 0 to
1, and then this point is going to be what? That point's going to
be 1 comma 1, right? 1 is equal to 1 squared, 1 is
equal to the square root of 1. So this point is
y is equal to 1. And then I'm not going to
draw this surface exactly. I'm just trying to give you a
sense of what the volume of the figure we're trying
to calculate is. If this is just some arbitrary
surface let me do it in a different color so
this is the top. This line is going vertical
in the z-direction. Actually, I could draw it like
this, like it's a curve. And then this curve back here
is going to be like a wall. And maybe I'll paint this side
of the wall just so you can see what it kind of looks like. Trying my best. Think you get an idea. Let me make it a little darker;
this is actually more of an exercise in art than in
math, in many ways. You get the idea. And then the boundary
here is like this. And this top isn't flat,
you know, it could be curved surface. I do a little like that,
but it's a curved surface. And we know in the example
we're about to do that the surface right here is z
is equal to x squared. So we want to figure out
the volume under this. So how do we do it? Well, let's think about it. We could actually use the
intuition that I just gave you. We're essentially just going to
take a da, which is a little small square down here, and
that little area, that's the same thing as the dx let me
use a darker color as a dx times a dy, and then we just
have to multiply it times f of xy, which is this, for
each area, and then some them all up. And then we could take a sum
in the x-direction first or the y-direction first. Now before doing that, just
to make sure that you have the intuition because the
boundaries are the hard part, let me just draw our xy plane. So let me rotate
it up like that. I'm just going to
draw our xy plane. Because that's what matters. Because the hard part here
is just figuring out our bounds of integration. So the curve is just y is
equal to x squared, look something like that. This is the point
y is equal to 1. This is y-axis, this is
the x-axis, this is the point x is equal to 1. That's not an x, that's a 1. This is the x. Anyway, so we want to figure
out, how do we sum up this dx times dy, or this da,
along this domain? So let's draw it. Let's visually draw it and it
doesn't hurt to do this when you actually have to do
the problem because this frankly is the hard part. A lot of calculus teachers will
just have you set up the integral and then say, OK,
well the rest is easy. Or the rest is Calc 1. OK, so this area, this area
here is the same thing as this area here. So its base is dx and
its height is dy. And then you could imagine
that we're looking at this thing from above. So the surface is up here some
place and we're looking straight down on it, and so
this is just this area. So let's say we wanted to
take the integral with respect to x first. So we want to sum up, so if we
want the volume above this column, first of all, is this
area times dx, dy, right? So let's write the volume
above that column. It's going to be the value of
the function, the height at that point, which is xy
squared times dx, dy. This expression gives us the
volume above this area, or this column right here. And let's say we want the sum
in the x direction first. So we want to sum that dx,
sum one here, sum here, et cetera, et cetera. So we're going to sum
in the x-direction. So my question to you
is, what is our lower bound of integration? Well, we're kind of holding
our y constant, right? And so if we go to the left, if
we go lower and lower x's we kind of bump into
the curve here. So the lower bound
of integration is actually the curve. And what is this curve
if we were to write x is a function of y? This curve is y is equal to
x squared, or x is equal to the square root of y. So if we're integrating with
respect to x for a fixed y right here we're integrating
in the horizontal direction first our lower bound is x is
equal to the square root of y. That's interesting. I think it's the first time
you've probably seen a variable bound integral. But it makes sense because for
this row that we're adding up right here, the upper
bound is easy. The upper bound is
x is equal to 1. The upper bound is x is equal
to 1, but the lower bound is x is equal to the
square root of y. Because you go back like,
oh, I bump into the curve. And what's the curve? Well the curve is x is equal to
the square root of y because we don't know which y we picked. Fair enough. So once we've figured out the
volume so that'll give us the volume above this rectangle
right here and then we want to add up the dy's. And remember, there's a
whole volume above what I'm drawing right here. I'm just drawing this
part in the xy plane. So what we've done just now,
this expression, as it's written right now, figures
out the volume above that rectangle. Now if we want to figure out
the entire volume of the solid, we integrate along the y-axis. Or we add up all the dy's. This was a dy right
here, not a dx. My dx's and dy's
look too similar. So now what is the lower bound
on the y-axis if I'm summing up these rectangles? Well, the lower bound
is y is equal to 0. So we're going to go from
y is equal to 0 to what what is the upper bound? to y is equal to 1. And there you have it. Let me rewrite that integral. So the double integral is going
to be from x is equal to square root of y to x is equal to
1, xy squared, dx, dy. And then the y bound, y
goes from 0 to y to 1. I've just realized
I've run out of time. In the next video we'll
evaluate this, and then we'll do it in the other order. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Double integrals 6 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Welcome back. In the last video we were just
figuring out the volume under the surface, and we had set
up these integral bounds. So let's see how to
evaluate it now. And look at this. I actually realized that I can
scroll things, which is quite useful because now I have
a lot more board space. So how do we evaluate
this integral? Well, the first integral I'm
integrating with respect to x. Right? I'm adding up the
little x sums. So I'm forming this
rectangle right here. Right? Or you could kind of view it
I'm holding y constant and integrating along the x-axis. I should switch colors. So what's the antiderivative of
x y squared with respect to x? Well it's just x
squared over 2. And then I have the y
squared that's just a constant all over 2. And I'm going to evaluate that
from x is equal to 1 to x is equal to the square root of y,
which you might be daunted by. But you'll see that it's
actually not that bad once you evaluate them. And then let me draw the
outside of the integral. This is y is equal to
0 to y is equal 1. dy. Now, if x is equal to 1
this expression becomes y squared over 2. Right? y squared over 2, minus now
if x is equal to square root of y, what does this
expression become? If x is equal to the
square root of y, then x squared is just y. And then y times y squared
is y to the third. Right? So it's y to the third over 3. Fair enough. And now I take the integral
with respect to y. So now I sum up all of these
rectangles in the y direction. 0, 1. This is with respect to y. And that's cool, right? Because when you take the first
integral with respect to x you end up with a function of y
anyway, so you might as well have your bounds as
functions of y's. It really doesn't make
it any more difficult. But anyway, back
to the problem. What is the antiderivative
of y squared over 2 minus y to the third over 3? Well the antiderivative of y
squared and you have to divide by 3, so it's
y cubed over 6. Minus y to the fourth
you have to divide by 4. Minus y to the fourth over
did I mess up some place? No, I think this is correct.
y to the fourth over 12. Oh wait. How did I get a 3 here? That's where I messed up. This is a 2, right? Let's see. x is square root of y. Yeah, this is a 2. I don't know how I ended up. Right? Square root of y squared
is y, times y squared y to the third over 2. Right. And then when I take
the integral of this it's 4 times 2. 8. Got to make sure I don't make
those careless mistakes. That's the tough part. I just want to make sure
that you got that too. I hate it when I do that. But I don't want to
re-record the whole video. So when I evaluated
this right. This is right, and then I take
the antiderivative of y to the third over 2, I get y
to the fourth over 8. And now I evaluate
this at 1 and 0. And that give us what? 1/6 minus 1/8 minus well both
of these when you evaluate them, are going to be 0's. So this is going to be
another 0 minus 0. So you don't have to
worry about that. So what's 1/6 minus 1/8? Let's see. 24. That's 4 minus 3 over 24, which
is equal to 1/24 is the volume of our figure. So this time, the way we just
did it, we took the integral with respect to x first, and
then we did it with respect to y. Let's do it the
other way around. So let me erase some things. And hopefully I won't make
these careless mistakes again. I'll keep this figure, but
I'll even erase this one. Let me erase all of this stuff. We have room to work with. So I kept that figure. But let me redraw just the
xy plane, just so we get the visualization right. It's more important to
visualize the xy plane in these problems than it
is to visualize the whole thing in 3-d. That's the y-axis,
that's the x-axis. OK. Our upper bound, you can
say, is the graph y is equal to x squared. Or, you could view it as
the bound x is equal to the square root of y. That is x is equal to 1,
that's y is equal to 1. And we care about the volume
above the shaded region. Right? That shaded region is this
yellow region right here. And let's draw our da. I'll draw a little
square actually. And I'll do it in magenta. So that's our little da. And the height is dy. That's a y. dy. And it's with this dx. Right? So the volume above this little
square that's the same thing as this little square. Just like we said before, the
volume above it is equal to the value of the function. Right? The height is the value of the
function, which is x y squared. And then we multiply it
times the area of the base. Well the area of the base, you
could say it's da, but we know it's really dy times dx. I didn't have to write
that times there. You can ignore it. And I wrote the y first
just because we're going to integrate with
respect to y first. We're going to sum
in the y direction. So what does summing in
the y direction mean? It means we're going to
add that square to that square to that square [COUGHING] Excuse me. So we're adding all the
dy's together, right? So my question to you is, what
is the upper bound on the y? Well once again, we
bump into the curve. Right? So the curve is the upper
bound when we go upwards. And what is the upper
bound on the curve? Well we're holding x
fixed, so for any given x what is this point? Well that's going
to be x squared. Right? Because this is the graph
of y equals x squared. So our upper bound is y
is equal to x squared. And what's our lower bound? We can keep adding these
squares down here. We're adding all the
little changes in y. So what's our lower bound? Well our lower bound is just 0. That was pretty
straightforward. So this expression, as it is
written right now, is the volume above this rectangle. Right? Let me draw it. Is the volume above
this rectangle. These are the same rectangles. The volume above
that rectangle. Now what we want to do is add
up all the dx's together, and we'll get the volume above
the entire surface. So that rectangle, now
we'll add it to another dx one, dx one like that. So what's the upper and
lower bounds on the x's? We're going from x is
equal to 0, right? We don't bump into the graph
when we go all the way down. So we go from x is equal to 0. And then our upper bound
is x is equal to 1. So x is equal to 0,
x is equal to 1. And in general, one way to
think about it is when you're doing kind of the last sum or
the last integral, you really shouldn't have variable
boundaries at this point. Right? Because our final answer has
to be a number, assuming that we're not dealing with
something very, very abstract. But our final answer is
going to have a number. So if you had some variables
here you probably did something wrong. And it's always useful, I
think, to draw that little da and then figure out OK,
I'm summing to dy first. When I go upwards I
bump into the curve. What is that upper bound
if x is constant? Oh, it's x squared. y
is equal to x squared. If I go down I bump into the
x-axis, or y is equal to 0. And so forth and so on. So now let's just evaluate
this and confirm that we get the same answer. So we're integrating with
respect to y first. So that's x y to the
third, over three. At x squared and 0. And then we have our outer
integral. x goes from 0 to 1. dx. If we substitute x
squared in for y. x squared to the third
power is x to the sixth. x to the sixth times
x let me write that. So we have x times x squared
to the third power, over 3. That equals x to the seventh. Right? x squared to the third
you multiply the exponents, and then you add these. x to the
seventh over 3, minus this evaluated with y is 0. But that's just going to be 0. Right? And then we evaluate
that from 0 to 1, dx. We're almost there. Increment the exponent. You get x to the eighth over 8. And we already have a 3 down
there, so it's over 24. And you evaluate
that from 0 to 1. And I think we get
the same answer. When you evaluate it at
1 you get 1/24 minus 0. So once again, when we
integrate in the other order you still get the volume of
the figure, being 1/4, whatever, cubic units. Anyway, see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Triple integrals 1 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say I wanted to find the
volume of a cube, where the values of the cube let's say
x is between x is greater than or equal to 0, is less
than or equal to, I don't know, 3. Let's say y is greater than
or equal to 0, and is less than or equal to 4. And then let's say that z is
greater than or equal to 0 and is less than or equal to 2. And I know, using basic
geometry you could figure out you know, just multiply the
width times the height times the depth and you'd
have the volume. But I want to do this example,
just so that you get used to what a triple integral looks
like, how it relates to a double integral, and then later
in the next video we could do something slightly
more complicated. So let's just draw
that, this volume. So this is my x-axis, this is
my z-axis, this is the y. x, y, z. OK. So x is between 0 and 3. So that's x is equal to 0. This is x is equal to
let's see, 1, 2, 3. y is between 0 and 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. So the x-y plane will look
something like this. The kind of base of our cube
will look something like this. And then z is between 0 and 2. So 0 is the x-y plane,
and then 1, 2. So this would be the top part. And maybe I'll do that in a
slightly different color. So this is along the x-z axis. You'd have a boundary
here, and then it would come in like this. You have a boundary here,
come in like that. A boundary there. So we want to figure out
the volume of this cube. And you could do it. You could say, well, the depth
is 3, the base, the width is 4, so this area is 12
times the height. 12 times 2 is 24. You could say it's 24
cubic units, whatever units we're doing. But let's do it as
a triple integral. So what does a triple
integral mean? Well, what we could do is we
could take the volume of a very small I don't want to say
area of a very small volume. So let's say I wanted to take
the volume of a small cube. Some place in this in the
volume under question. And it'll start to make more
sense, or it starts to become a lot more useful, when we have
variable boundaries and surfaces and curves
as boundaries. But let's say we want to
figure out the volume of this little, small cube here. That's my cube. It's some place in this larger
cube, this larger rectangle, cubic rectangle, whatever
you want to call it. So what's the volume
of that cube? Let's say that its width is dy. So that length
right there is dy. It's height is dx. Sorry, no, it's
height is dz, right? The way I drew it,
z is up and down. And it's depth is dx. This is dx. This is dz. This is dy. So you can say that a small
volume within this larger volume you could call that
dv, which is kind of the volume differential. And that would be equal to,
you could say, it's just the width times the
length times the height. dx times dy times dz. And you could switch the
orders of these, right? Because multiplication is
associative, and order doesn't matter and all that. But anyway, what can you
do with it in here? Well, we can take the integral. All integrals help us do is
help us take infinite sums of infinitely small distances,
like a dz or a dx or a dy, et cetera. So, what we could do is we
could take this cube and first, add it up in, let's
say, the z direction. So we could take that cube and
then add it along the up and down axis the z-axis
so that we get the volume of a column. So what would that look like? Well, since we're going up and
down, we're adding we're taking the sum in
the z direction. We'd have an integral. And then what's the
lowest z value? Well, it's z is equal to 0. And what's the upper bound? Like if you were to just take
keep adding these cubes, and keep going up, you'd run
into the upper bound. And what's the upper bound? It's z is equal to 2. And of course, you would
take the sum of these dv's. And I'll write dz first. Just so it reminds us
that we're going to take the integral with
respect to z first. And let's say we'll do y next. And then we'll do x. So this integral, this value,
as I've written it, will figure out the volume of a
column given any x and y. It'll be a function of x and y,
but since we're dealing with all constants here, it's
actually going to be a constant value. It'll be the constant value
of the volume of one of these columns. So essentially, it'll
be 2 times dy dx. Because the height of one
of these columns is 2, and then its with and
its depth is dy and dx. So then if we want to figure
out the entire volume what we did just now is we figured
out the height of a column. So then we could take those
columns and sum them in the y direction. So if we're summing in the y
direction, we could just take another integral of this
sum in the y direction. And y goes from 0 to what?
y goes from 0 to 4. I wrote this integral a
little bit too far to the left, it looks strange. But I think you get the idea. y is equal to 0, to
y is equal to 4. And then that'll give us the
volume of a sheet that is parallel to the zy plane. And then all we have left to do
is add up a bunch of those sheets in the x direction, and
we'll have the volume of our entire figure. So to add up those sheets,
we would have to sum in the x direction. And we'd go from x is equal
to 0, to x is equal to 3. And to evaluate this
is actually fairly straightforward. So, first we're taking the
integral with respect to z. Well, we don't have anything
written under here, but we can just assume that
there's a 1, right? Because dz times dy times
dx is the same thing as 1 times dz times dy dx. So what's the value
of this integral? Well, the antiderivative
of 1 with respect to z is just z, right? Because the derivative
of z is 1. And you evaluate
that from 2 to 0. So then you're left with
so it's 2 minus 0. So you're just left with 2. So you're left with 2, and you
take the integral of that from y is equal to 0, to y is equal
to 4 dy, and then you have the x. From x is equal to 0,
to x is equal to 3 dx. And notice, when we just took
the integral with respect to z, we ended up with
a double integral. And this double integral is the
exact integral we would have done in the previous videos on
the double integral, where you would have just said, well,
z is a function of x and y. So you could have written, you
know, z, is a function of x and y, is always equal to 2. It's a constant function. It's independent of x and y. But if you had defined z in
this way, and you wanted to figure out the volume under
this surface, where the surface is z is equal to 2 you
know, this is a surface, is z is equal to 2 we would
have ended up with this. So you see that what we're
doing with the triple integral, it's really,
really nothing different. And you might be wondering,
well, why are we doing it at all? And I'll show you
that in a second. But anyway, to evaluate
this, you could take the antiderivative of this with
respect to y, you get 2y let me scroll down a little bit. You get 2y evaluating
that at 4 and 0. And then, so you get 2 times 4. So it's 8 minus 0. And then you integrate
that from, with respect to x from 0 to 3. So that's 8x from 0 to 3. So that'll be equal to
24 four units cubed. So I know the obvious question
is, what is this good for? Well, when you have a kind
of a constant value within the volume, you're right. You could have just done
a double integral. But what if I were to tell you,
our goal is not to figure out the volume of this figure. Our goal is to figure out
the mass of this figure. And even more, this volume
this area of space or whatever its mass
is not uniform. If its mass was uniform, you
could just multiply its uniform density times its volume,
and you'd get its mass. But let's say the
density changes. It could be a volume of some
gas or it could be even some material with different
compounds in it. So let's say that its density
is a variable function of x, y, and z. So let's say that the density
this row, this thing that looks like a p is what you normally
use in physics for density so its density is a function
of x, y, and z. Let's just to make it
simple let's make it x times y times z. If we wanted to figure out the
mass of any small volume, it would be that volume times
the density, right? Because density the units of
density are like kilograms per meter cubed. So if you multiply it times
meter cubed, you get kilograms. So we could say that the mass
well, I'll make up notation, d mass this isn't a function. Well, I don't want to write it
in parentheses, because it makes it look like a function. So, a very differential mass,
or a very small mass, is going to equal the density at that
point, which would be xyz, times the volume of that
of that small mass. And that volume of that small
mass we could write as dv. And we know that dv is the
same thing as the width times the height times the depth. dv doesn't always have to
be dx times dy times dz. If we're doing other
coordinates, if we're doing polar coordinates, it could be
something slightly different. And we'll do that eventually. But if we wanted to figure out
the mass, since we're using rectangular coordinates, it
would be the density function at that point times our
differential volume. So times dx dy dz. And of course, we can
change the order here. So when you want to figure out
the volume when you want to figure out the mass which I
will do in the next video, we essentially will have to
integrate this function. As opposed to just
1 over z, y and x. And I'm going to do that
in the next video. And you'll see that it's really
just a lot of basic taking antiderivatives and avoiding
careless mistakes. I will see you in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Triple integrals 2 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we had this
rectangle, and we used a triple integral to figure
out it's volume. And I know you were probably
thinking, well, I could have just used my basic geometry
to multiply the height times the width times the depth. And that's true because this
was a constant-valued function. And then even once we
evaluated, once we integrated with respect to z, we ended up
with a double integral, which is exactly what you would have
done in the last several videos when we just learned the
volume under a surface. But then we added a twist
at the end of the video. We said, fine, you could have
figured out the volume within this rectangular domain, I
guess, very straightforward using things you already knew. But what if our goal is not
to figure out the volume? Our goal was to figure out the
mass of this volume, and even more, the material that we're
taking the volume of whether it's a volume of gas or a
volume of some solid that its density is not constant. So now the mass becomes
kind of I don't know interesting to calculate. And so, what we defined, we
defined a density function. And rho, this p looking thing
with a curvy bottom that gives us the density
at any given point. And at the end of the
last video we said, well, what is mass? Mass is just density
times volume. You could view it another way. Density is the same thing
as mass divided by volume. So the mass around a very, very
small point, and we called that d mass, the differential of the
mass, is going equal the density at that point, or the
rough density at exactly that point, times the volume
differential around that point, times the volume of this
little small cube. And then, as we saw it on the
last video, if you're using rectangular coordinates, this
volume differential could just be the x distance times the y
distance times the z distance. So, the density was that our
density function is defined to be x, y, and z, and we
wanted to figure out the mass of this volume. And let's say that our x, y,
and z coordinates their values, let's say they're in
meters and let's say this density is in kilograms
per meter cubed. So our answer is going to be in
kilograms if that was the case. And those are kind of the
traditional Si units. So let's figure out the mass of
this variably dense volume. So all we do is we have the
same integral up here. So the differential of mass
is going to be this value, so let's write that down. It is x I want to make sure
I don't run out of space. xyz times and I'm
going to integrate with respect to dz first. But you could actually
switch the order. Maybe we'll do that
in the next video. We'll do dz first, then we'll
do dy, then we'll do dx. Once again, this is just
the mass at any small differential of volume. And if we integrate with z
first we said z goes from what? The boundaries on
z were 0 to 2. The boundaries on
y were 0 to 4. And the boundaries on
x, x went from 0 to 3. And how do we evaluate this? Well, what is the
antiderivative we're integrating with
respect to z first. So what's the antiderivative
of xyz with respect to z? Well, let's see. This is just a constant so
it'll be xyz squared over 2. Right? Yeah, that's right. And then we'll evaluate
that from 2 to 0. And so you get I know I'm
going to run out of space. So you're going to get
2 squared, which is 4, divided by 2, which is 2. So it's 2xy minus 0. So when you evaluate just this
first we'll get 2xy, and now you have the other
two integrals left. So I didn't write the
other two integrals down. Maybe I'll write it down. So then you're left
with two integrals. You're left with dy and dx. And y goes from 0 to 4
and x goes from 0 to 3. I'm definitely going
to run out of space. And now you take the
antiderivative of this with respect to y. So what's the antiderivative
of this with respect to y? Let me erase some stuff just
so I don't get too messy. I was given the very good
suggestion of making it scroll, but, unfortunately,
I didn't make it scroll enough this time. So I can delete this
stuff, I think. Oops, I deleted some of that. But you know what I deleted. OK, so let's take
the antiderivative with respect to y. I'll start it up here
where I have space. OK, so the antiderivative of
2xy with respect to y is y squared over 2, 2's cancel out. So you get xy squared. And y goes from 0 to 4. And then we still have the
outer integral to do. x goes from 0 to 3 dx. And when y is equal
to 4 you get 16x. And then when y is 0
the whole thing is 0. So you have 16x integrated
from 0 to 3 dx. And that is equal to what? 8x squared. And you evaluate
it from 0 to 3. When it's 3, 8 times 9 is 72. And 0 times 8 is 0. So the mass of our figure the
volume we figured out last time was 24 meters cubed. I erased it, but if you
watched the last video that's what we learned. But it's mass is 72 kilograms. And we did that by integrating
this 3 variable density function this function
of 3 variables. Or in three-dimensions
you can view it as a scalar field, right? At any given point, there
is a value, but not really a direction. And that value is a density. But we integrated the scalar
field in this volume. So that's kind of the new
skill we learned with the triple integral. And in the next video I'll
show you how to set up more complicated triple integrals. But the real difficulty with
triple integrals is and I think you'll see that your
calculus teacher will often do this when you're doing triple
integrals, unless you have a very easy figure like this, the
evaluation if you actually wanted to analytically evaluate
a triple integral that has more complicated boundaries or more
complicated for example, a density function. The integral gets very
hairy, very fast. And it's often very difficult
or very time consuming to evaluate it analytically just
using your traditional calculus skills. So you'll see that on a lot of
calculus exams when they start doing the triple integral, they
just want you to set it up. They take your word for it that
you've done so many integrals so far that you could
take the antiderivative. And sometimes, if they really
want to give you something more difficult they'll just say,
well, switch the order. You know, this is the integral
when we're dealing with respect to z, then y, then x. We want you to rewrite
this integral when you switch the order. And we will do that
in the next video. See you soon. 

Transcript for: Triple integrals 3 | Double and triple integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's now do another triple
integral, and in this one I won't actually evaluate
the triple integral. But what we'll do is we'll
define the triple integral. We're going to something
similar that we did in the second video where we
figured out the mass using a density function. But what I want to do in this
video is show you how to set the boundaries when the
figure is a little bit more complicated. And if we have time we'll try
to do it where we change the order of integration. So let's say I have the surface
 let me just make something up  2x plus 3z plus
y is equal to 6. Let's draw that surface. It looks something like this. This will be my x-axis. This is going to be my z-axis. This is going to be my y-axis. Draw them out. x, y and z. And I care about the surface in
the kind of positive octant, right, because when you're
dealing with three-dimensionals we have, instead of four
quadrants we have eight octants. But we want the octant where
all x, y and z is positive, which is the one I drew here. So let's see, let me draw some
 what is the x-intercept? When y and z are 0,
so we'll write here, that's the x-intercept. 2x is equal to 6, so
x is equal to 3. So 1, 2, 3. So that's the x-intercept. The y-intercept when x and
z are 0 are on the y-axis, so y will be equal to 6. so we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6 is the y-intercept. Then finally the z-intercept
when x and y are 0 we're on the z-axis. 3z will be equal to 6. So z is equal to 1, 2. So the figure that I care about
will look something like this  it's be this
inclined surface. It will look
something like that. In this positive octant. So this is the surface
defined by this function. Let's say that I care about
the volume, and I'm going to make it a little
bit more complicated. We could say oh, well let's find the volume between the surface and the xy plane. But I'm going to make it a
little bit more complicated. Let's say the volume above
this surface, and the surface z is equal to 2. So the volume we care
about is going to look something like this. Let me see if I can
pull off drawing this. If we go up 2 here  let me
draw the top in a different color, let me draw
the top in green. So this is along the zy plane. And then the other
edge is going to look something like this. Let me make sure I can draw it
 this is the hardest part. We'll go up 2 here, and this
is along the zx plane. And we'd have another line
connecting these two. So this green triangle,
this is part of the plane z is equal to 2. The volume we care about is the
volume between this top green plane and this tilted plane
defined by 2x plus 3z plus y is equal to 6. So this area in between. Let me see if I can make
it a little bit clearer. Because the visualization, as I
say, is often the hardest part. So we'd have kind of a front
wall here, and then the back wall would be this wall back
here, and then there'd be another wall here. And then the base of it, the
base I'll do in magenta will be this plane. So the base is that plane
 that's the bottom part. Anyway, I don't know if I
should have made it that messy because we're going to have to
draw dv's and d volumes on it. But anyway, let's try our best. So, if we're going to figure
out the volume  and actually, since we're doing a triple
integral and we want to show that we have to do the triple
integral, instead of doing a volume, let's do the mass of
something of variable density. So let's say the density in
this volume that we care about, the density function is a
function of x, y and z. It can be anything. That's not the point of what
I'm trying to teach here. But I'll just define something. Let's say it's x squared yz. Our focus is really just
to set up the integrals. So the first thing I like to do
is I visualize  what we're going to do is we're going to
set up a little cube in the volume under consideration. So if I had a  let me do it
in a bold color so that you can see it  so if I have a cube
 maybe I'll do it in brown, it's not as bold but it's
different enough from the other colors. So if I had a little cube
here in the volume under consideration, that's a little
cube  you consider that dv. The volume of that cube is kind
of a volume differential. And that is equal to dx 
no, sorry, this is dy. Let me do this in yellow,
or green even better. So dy, which is this. dy times dx, dx times dz. That's the volume of
that little cube. And if we wanted to know the
mass of that cube, we would multiply the density function
at that point times this dv. So the mass, you could call
it d  I don't know, dm. The mass differential is going
to be equal to that times that. So x squared y z times this. dy, dx, and dz. And we normally switch this
order around, depending on what we're going to integrate with
respect to first so we don't get confused. So let's try to do this. Let's try to set
up this integral. So let's do it traditionally. The last couple of triple
integrals we did we integrated with respect to z first. So let's do that. So we're going to integrate
with respect to z first. so we're going to take this cube
and we're going to sum up all of the cubes in the z-axis. So going up and
down first, right? So if we do that, what
is the bottom boundary? So when you sum up up and down,
these cubes are going to turn to columns, right? So what is the bottom of the
column, the bottom bound? What's the surface? It's the surface
defined right here. So, if we want that bottom
bound defined in terms of z, we just have to solve
this in terms of z. So let's subtract. So what do we get. If we want this defined in
terms of z, we get 3z is equal to 6 minus 2x minus y. Or z is equal 2 minus
2/3x minus y over 3. This is the same thing as that. But when we're talking about
z, explicitly defining a z, this is how we get it,
algebraically manipulated. So the bottom boundary  and
you can visualize it, right? The bottom of these columns
are going to go up and down. We're going to add up all
the columns in up and down direction, right? You can imagine summing them. The bottom boundary is
going to be this surface. z is equal to 2 minus
2/3x minus y over 3. And then what's
the upper bound? Well, the top of the column
is going to be this green plane, and what did we
say the green plane was? It was z is equal to 2. That's this plane, this
surface right here. Z is equal to 2. And, of course, what is the
volume of that column? Well, it's going to be the
density function, x squared yz times the volume differential,
but we're integrating with respect to z first. Let me write dz there. I don't know, let's say we want
to integrate with respect to  I don't know, we want to
integrate with respect to x for next. In the last couple of
videos, I integrated with respect to y next. So let's do x just to show you
it really doesn't matter. So we're going to integrate
with respect to x. So, now we have these
columns, right? When we integrate with respect
to z, we get the volume of each of these columns wher the
top boundary is that plane. Let's see if I can
draw it decently. The top boundary is that plane. The bottom boundary
is this surface. Now we want to integrate
with respect to x. So we're going to add
up all of the dx's. So what is the bottom
boundary for the x's? Well, this surface is defined
all the way to  the volume under question is defined all
the way until x is equal to 0. And if you get confused, and
it's not that difficult to get confused when you're imagining
these three-dimensional things, say you know what, we already
integrated with respect to z. The two variables I
have left are x and y. Let me draw the projection of
our volume onto the xy plane, and what does that look like? So I will do that. Because that actually does
help simplify things. So if we twist it, if we take
this y and flip it out like that, and x like that we'll get
in kind of the traditional way that we learned when we
first learned algebra. The xy-axis. So this is x, this is y. And this point is what? Or this point? What is that? That's x is equal to 3. So it's 1, 2, 3. That's x is equal to 3. And this point right here
is y is equal to 6. So 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So on the xy-axis, kind of the
domain  you can view it that  looks something like that. So one way to think about it is
we've figured out if these columns  we've integrated
up/down or along the z-axis. But when you view it looking
straight down onto it, you're looking on the xy plane, each
of our columns are going to look like this where the
column's going to pop out out of your screen in
the z direction. But the base of each column is
going to dx like that, and then dy up and down, right? So we decided to integrate
with respect to x next. So we're going to add up each
of those columns in the x direction, in the
horizontal direction. So the question was what
is the bottom boundary? What is the lower bound
in the x direction? Well, it's x is equal to 0. If there was a line here, then
it would be that line probably as a function of y, or
definitely as a function of y. So our bottom bound here
is x is equal to 0. What's our top bound? I realize I'm already pushing. Well, our top bound is this
relation, but it has to be in terms of x, right? So what is this relation. So, you could view it as kind
of saying well, if z is equal to 0, what is this line? What is this line right here? So z is equal to 0. We have 2x plus y
is equal to 6. We want the relationship
in terms of x. So we get 2x is equal to 6
minus y where x is equal to 3 minus y over 2. And then finally we're going to
integrate with respect to y. And this is the easy part. So we've integrated up and
down to get a column. These are the bases of the
column, so we've integrated in the x direction. Now we just have to go up and
down with respect to y, or in the xy plane with respect to y. So what is the y
bottom boundary? Well, it's 0. y is equal to 0. And the top boundary
is y is equal to 6. And there you have it. We have set up the integral
and now it's just a matter of chugging through
it mechanically. But I've run out of time
and I don't want this video to get rejected. So I'll leave you there. See you in the next video. 

Transcript for: (2^ln x)/x  Antiderivative Example
I was just looking on the
discussion boards on the Khan Academy Facebook page, and Bud
Denny put up this problem, asking for it to be solved. And it seems like a problem
of general interest. If the indefinite integral of
2 to the natural log of x over, everything over x, dx. And on the message board, Abhi
Khanna also put up a solution, and it is the correct solution,
but I thought this was of general interest, so I'll
make a quick video on it. So the first thing when you see
an integral like this, is you say, hey, you know, I have this
natural log of x up in the numerator, and
where do I start? And the first thing that should
maybe pop out at you, is that this is the same thing as the
integral of one over x times 2 to the natural log of x, dx. And so you have an expression
here, or it's kind of part of our larger function, and you
have its derivative, right? We know that the derivative,
let me write it over here, we know that the derivative with
respect to x of the natural log of x is equal to 1/x. So we have some expression, and
we have its derivative, which tells us that we can
use substitution. Sometimes you can do in your
head, but this problem, it's still not trivial to
do in your head. So let's make the substitution. Let's substitute this
right here with a u. So let's do that. So if you define u, and it
doesn't have to be u, it's just, that's the convention,
it's called u-substitution, it could have been s-substitution
for all we care. Let's say u is equal to the
natural log of x, and then du dx, the derivative of u with
respect to x, of course is equal to 1/x. Or, just the differential du,
if we just multiply both sides by dx is equal to 1 over x dx. So let's make our substitution. This is our integral. So this will be equal to the
indefinite integral, or the antiderivative, of 2 to the
now u, so 2 to the u, times 1 over x dx. Now what is 1 over x dx? That's just du. So this term times that
term is just our du. Let me do it in a
different color. 1 over x times dx is
just equal to du. That's just equal to that
thing, right there. Now, this still doesn't look
like an easy integral, although it's gotten simplified
a good bit. And to solve, you know,
whenever I see the variable that I'm integrating against
in the exponent, you know, we don't have any easy
exponent rules here. The only thing that I'm
familiar with, where I have my x or my variable that I'm
integrating against in my exponent, is the
case of e to the x. We know that the integral of
e to the x, dx, is equal to e to the x plus c. So if I could somehow turn this
into some variation of e to the x, maybe, or e to the u, maybe
I can make this integral a little bit more tractable. So let's see. How can we redefine
this right here? Well, 2, 2 is equal to what? 2 is the same thing as e to
the natural log of 2, right? The natural log of 2 is
the power you have to raise e to to get 2. So if you raise e to
that power, you're, of course going to get 2. This is actually the definition
of really, the natural log. You raise e to the natural log
of 2, you're going to get 2. So let's rewrite this, using
this I guess we could call this this rewrite or I
don't want to call it quite a substitution. It's just a different way
of writing the number 2. So this will be equal to,
instead of writing the number 2, I could write e to
the natural log of 2. And all of that to the u du. And now what is this equal to? Well, if I take something to an
exponent, and then to another exponent, this is the same
thing as taking my base to the product of those exponents. So this is equal to, let me
switch colors, this is equal to the integral of e,
to the u, e to the, let me write it this way. e to the natural
log of 2 times u. I'm just multiplying
these two exponents. I raise something to something,
then raise it again, we know from our exponent rules,
it's just a product of those two exponents. du. Now, this is just a constant
factor, right here. This could be, you know, this
could just be some number. We could use a calculator to
figure out what this is. We could set this equal to a. But we know in general that
the integral, this is pretty straightforward, we've
now put it in this form. The antiderivative of e
to the au, du, is just 1 over a e to the au. This comes from this definition
up here, and of course plus c, and the chain rule. If we take the derivative of
this, we take the derivative of the inside, which
is just going to be a. We multiply that times the
one over a, it cancels out, and we're just
left with e to the au. So this definitely works out. So the antiderivative of this
thing right here is going to be equal to 1 over our a, it's
going to be 1 over our constant term, 1 over the natural log of
2 times our whole expression, e e. And I'm going to do something. This is just some number times
u, so I can write it as u times some number. And I'm just doing that to put
in a form that might help us simplify it a little bit. So it's e to the u times the
natural log of 2, right? All I did, is I
swapped this order. I could have written this
as e to the natural log of 2 times u. If this an a, a times u is
the same thing as u times a. Plus c. So this is our answer, but we
have to kind of reverse substitute before we can feel
satisfied that we've taken the antiderivative
with respect to x. But before I do that, let's
see if I can simplify this a little bit. What is, if I have, just from
our natural log properties, or logarithms, a times
the natural log of b. We know this is the same
thing as the natural log of b to the a. Let me draw a line here. Right? That this becomes the exponent
on whatever we're taking the natural log of. So u, let me write this here,
u times the natural log of 2, is the same thing as the
natural log of 2 to the u. So we can rewrite our
antiderivative as being equal to 1 over the natural log of 2,
that's just that part here, times e to the, this can be
rewritten based on this logarithm property, as the
natural log of 2 to the u, and of course we still have
our plus c there. Now, what is e raised to the
natural log of 2 to the u? The natural log of 2 to the u
is the power that you have to raise e to to get to
2 to the u, right? By definition! So if we raise e to that power,
what are we going to get? We're going to get 2 to the u. So this is going to be equal to
1 over the natural log of 2. This simplifies to
just 2 to the u. I drew it up here. The natural log a I could just
write in general terms, let me do it up here, and maybe
I'm beating a dead horse. But I can in general write any
number a as being equal to e to the natural log of a. This is the exponent you have
to raise e to to get a. If you raise e to that,
you're going to get a. So e to the natural log of 2 to
the u, that's just 2 to the u. And then I have my
plus c, of course. And now we can
reverse substitute. What did we set u equal to? We defined u, up here, as equal
to the natural log of x. So let's just reverse
substitute right here. And so the answer to our
original equation, your answer to, let me write it here,
because it's satisfying when you see it, to this kind of
fairly convoluted-looking antiderivative problem, 2 to
the natural log of x over x dx, we now find is equal to, we
just replaced u with natural log of x, because that was our
substitution, and 1 over the natural log of 2 times 2 to the
natural log of x plus c. And we're done. This isn't in the denominator,
the way I wrote it might look a little ambiguous. And we're done! And that was a pretty neat
problem, and so thanks to Bud for posting that. 

Transcript for: Introduction to the line integral | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
If we're just dealing with two
dimensions, and we want to find the area under a curve, we have
good tools in our toolkit already to do it, and I'll
just remind us of our tools. so let's say, that's the
x-axis, that's the y-axis, let me draw some arbitrary function
right here, and that's my function f of x. And let's say we want to find
the area between x is equal to a, so that's x equal to
a, and x is equal to b. We saw this many, many,
many videos ago. The way you can think about it,
is you take super small widths of x, or super small
changes in x. We could call them delta x's,
but because they're so small, we're going to call them a dx. Super, infinitesimally
small changes in x. And then you multiply them
times the value of f of x at that point. So you multiply it times the
height at that point, which is the value of f of x. So you get f of x times each of
these infinitesimally small bases, that'll give you the
area of this infinitesimally narrow rectangle right there. And since each of these guys
are infinitely small, you're going to have an infinite
number of these rectangles in order to fill the space. You're going to have
an infinite number of these, right? And so the tool we use was
the definite integral. The definite integral is a sum,
is an infinite sum of these infinitely small areas,
or these infinitely small rectangles. And the notations that we
use, they would go from a b. And we've done many videos
on how do you evaluate these things. I just want to remind
you, conceptually, what this is saying. This is conceptually saying,
let's take a small change in x, multiply it times the height at
that point, and you're going to have an infinite number of
these, because these x's are super small, they're infinitely
small, so you're going to have an infinite number of those. So take an infinite sum of all
of those, from x is equal to a to x is equal to b. And that's just our standard
definite integral. Now what I want to do in this
video is extend this, broaden this a little bit, to solve, I
guess it maybe could say a harder or a broader
class of problems. Let's say that we are, let's
go to three dimensions now. And I'll just draw
the x-y plane first. Maybe I'll keep this, just to
kind of make the analogy clear. I'm going to kind of
flatten this, so we have some perspective. So let's say that this right
here is the y-axis, kind of going behind the screen. You can imagine if I
just pushed on this and knocked it down. So that's the y-axis, and that
is my x-axis right there. And let's say I some
path in the x-y plane. And in order to really define a
path in the x-y plane, I'll have to parameterize both
the x and y variables. So let's say that x is equal
to, let me switch colors. I'm using that orange too much. Let's say that x is is equal to
some function of some parameter t, and let's say y is equal to
some other function of that same parameter t, and let's say
we're going to start, we're going to have t go from, t is
going to be greater than or equal to a, and then less
than or equal to b. Now this will define a path in
the x-y plane, and if this seems confusing, you might want
to review the videos on parametric equations. But essentially, when t is
equal to a, you're going to have x is equal to, so t is
equal to a, you're going to have x is equal to g of a,
and you're going to have y is equal to h of a. So you're going to have this
point right here, so maybe it might be, I don't know, I'll
just draw a random point here. When t is equal to a,
you're going to plot the coordinate point g of a. That's going to be
our x-coordinate. This is g of a, right here. And then our y-coordinate
is going to be h of a. Right? You just put t is equal to a
in each of these equations, and then you get a
value for x and y. So this coordinate right
here would be h of a. And then, you would keep
incrementing t larger and larger, until you get to b, but
you're going to get a series of points that are going to
look something like that. That right there is a curve, or
it's a path, in the x-y plane. And you know, you're saying,
how does that relate to that right now? What are we doing? Well, let me just write a c
here, for saying, that's our curve, our that's our path. Now, let's say I have another
function that associates every point in the x-y plane
with some value. So let's say I have some
function, f of x y. What it does is associate
every point on the x-y plane with some value. So let me plot f of x y. Let me make a
vertical axis here. We could do a different color. Call it the f of x y axis,
maybe we could even call it the z-axis, if you want to. But some vertical
axis right there. And for every point, so if you
give me an x and a y, and put into my f of x y function, it's
going to give you some point. So I can just draw some
type of a surface that f of x y represents. And this'll all become a lot
more concrete when I do some concrete examples. So let's say that f of x y
looks something like this. I'm going to try my
best to draw it. I'll do a different color. Let's say f of x y. Some surface. I'll draw part of it. It's some surface that
looks, let's say it looks something like that. That is f of x y. And remember, all this is, is
you give me an x, you give me a y, you pop it into f of x y,
it's going to give me some third value that we're going to
plot in this vertical axis right here. I mean, example, f of x y? It could be, I'm not saying
this is a particular case, it could be x plus y. It could be f of x y. These are just examples. It could be x times y. If x is 1, y is 2, f of
x y will be 1 times 2. But let's say when you plot,
for every point on the x-y plane, when you plot f of x y
you get this surface up here, and we want to do
something interesting. We want to figure out, not the
area under this curve, this was very simple when we
did it the first time. I want to find the area if you
imagine a curtain, or a fence, that goes along this curve. You can imagine this being a
very straight linear path, going just along the
x-axis from a to b. Now we have this kind of crazy,
curvy path that's going along the x-y plane. And you can imagine if you drew
a wall, or curtain, or a fence that went straight up from this
to my f of x y, let me do my best effort to draw that. Let me draw it. So it's going to go up to
there, and maybe this point corresponds to there. And when you draw that curtain
up, it's going to intersect it something like that. Let's say it looks
something like that. So this point right here
corresponds to that point right there. So if you imagine, you have a
curtain, f of x y is the roof, and this is a, what I've drawn
here, this curve, this kind of shows you the bottom of a wall. This is some kind
of crazy wall. And let me say, this point it
corresponds to, well, actually, let me draw it little
bit different. This point will correspond to
some point up here, so when you trace where it intersects, it
will look something maybe like that, I don't know. Something like that. And I'm trying my best to
help you visualize this. So maybe I'll shade this in
to make it a little solid, let's say f of x y is
little transparent. You can see. But you have this
curvy-looking wall here. And the whole point of this
video is, how can we figure out the area of this curvy-looking
wall, that's essentially the wall or the fence that happens
if you go from this curve and jump up, and hit the
ceiling at this f of x y? So let's think a little bit
about how we can do it. Well, if we just use the
analogy of what we did previously, we could
say, well look. Let's make a little change
in distance of our curve. Let's call that ds. That's a little change
in distance of my curve, right there. And if I multiply that change
in distance of the curve times f of x y at that point, I'm
going to get the area of that little rectangle right there. Right? So if I take the ds, my change
in my, you can imagine the arc length of this curve at that
point, so let me write, you know, ds is equal to super
small change in arc length of our path, or of our curve. That's our ds. So you can imagine, the area of
that little rectangle right there, along my curvy wall, is
going to be ds, I'll make it a capital S, ds times the
height at that point. Well, that's f of x y. And then if I take the sum,
because these are infinitely narrow, these ds's have
infinitely small width, if I were take the infinite sum of
all of those guys, from t is equal to a to t is equal to b,
right, from t is equal to a, I keep taking the sum of those
rectangles, to t is equal to b, right there, that
will give me my area. I'm just using the exact same
logic as I did up there. I'm not being very
mathematically rigorous, but I want to give you the intuition
of what we're doing. We're really just bending the
base of this thing to get a curvy wall instead of a
straight, direct wall like we had up here. But you're saying, Sal, this is
all abstract, and how can I even calculate something like
this, this makes no sense to me, I have an s here, I have
an x and a y, I have a t, what can I do with this? And let's see if we can
make some headway. And I promise you, when we do
it with a tangible problem, the end product of this video
is going to be a little bit hairy to look at. But when we do it with an
actual problem, it'll actually, I think, be very concrete, and
you'll see it's not too hard to deal with. But let's see if we can get
all of this in terms of t. So first of all, let's
focus just on this ds. So let me re-pick
up the x-y axis. So if I were to reflip the
x-y, let me switch colors, this is just getting
a little monotonous. So if I were to reflip the x-y
axis like that, actually, let me do that with that same
green, so you know we're dealing with the same x-y axis. So that's my y-axis,
that is my x-axis. And so this path right here, if
I were to just draw it straight up like this, it would
look something like this. Right? That's my path, my arc. You know, this is when t is
equal to a, so this is t is equal to a, this is
t is equal to b. Same thing, I just kind
of picked it back up so you can visualize it. And we say that we have some
change in arc length, let's say, let me switch colors. Let's say that this
one right here. Let's say that's some small
change in arc length, and we're calling that ds. Now, is there some way to
relate ds to infinitely small changes in x or y? Well, if we think about it, if
we really and this is all a little bit hand-wavy, I'm not
being mathematically rigorous, but I think it'll give you the
correct intuition if you imagine this is, you can figure
out the length of ds if you know the length of these
super small changes in x and super small changes in y. So if this distance right here
is ds, infinitesimally small change in x, this distance
right here is dy, infinitesimally small
change in y, right? Then we could figure out ds
from the Pythagorean Theorem. You can say that ds is going to
be, it's the hypotenuse of this triang.e It's equal to the
square root of dx squared plus dy squared. So that seems to make things a
little bit, you know, we can get rid of the ds
all of a sudden. So let's rewrite this little
expression here, using this sense of what ds, is really
the square root of dx squared plus dy squared. And I'm not being very
rigorous, and actually it's very hard to be rigorous with
differentials, but intuitively I think it makes
a lot of sense. So we can say that this
integral, the area of this curvy curtain, is going to be
the integral from t is equal to a to t is equal to b of f of x
y, instead of writing ds, we can write this, times the
square root of dx squared plus dy squared. Now we at least got rid of this
big capital S, but we still haven't solved the problem of,
how do you solve something, you know, an integral, a definite
integral that looks like this? We have it in terms of t
here, but we only have it in terms of x's and y's here. So we need to get
everything in terms of t. Well, we know x and y are both
functions of t, so we can actually rewrite it like this. We can rewrite it as from t is
equal to a, to t is equal to b. And f of x y, we can write it,
f is a function of x, which is a function of t, and f is also
a function of y, which is also a function of t. So you give me a t, I'll be
able to give you an x or y, and once you give me an x or y,
I can figure out what f is. So we have that, and then we
have this part right here. I'll do it in orange. Square root of dx squared
plus dy squared. But we still don't have
things in terms of t. We need a dt someplace
here in order be able to evaluate this integral. And we'll see that in the
next video, when I do a concrete problem. But I really want to give you a
sense for the end product, the formula we're going to get
at the end product of this video, where it comes from. So one thing we can do, is if
we allow ourselves to algebraically manipulate
differentials, what we can do is let us multiply
and divide by dt. So one way to think about it,
you could rewrite, so let me just do this orange
part right here. Let's do a little
side right here. So if you take this orange
part, and write it in pink, and you have dx squared, and then
you have plus dy squared, and let's say you just multiply
it times dt over dt, right? That's a small change in t,
divided by a small change in t. That's 1, so of course you
can multiply it by that. If we're to bring in this part
inside of the square root sign, right, so let me rewrite this. This is the same thing as 1
over dt times the square root of dx squared plus dy squared,
and then times that dt. Right? I just wanted to write it
this way to show you I'm just multiplying by 1. And here, I'm just taking this
dt, writing it there, and leaving this over here. And now if I wanted to bring
this into the square root sign, this is the same thing, this is
equal to, and I'll do it very slowly, just to make sure, I'll
allow you to believe that I'm not doing anything shady
with the algebra. This is the same thing as the
square root of 1 over dt squared, let me make the
radical a little bit bigger, times dx squared plus
dy squared, and all of that times dt, right? I didn't do anything, you could
just take the square root of this and you'd get 1 over dt. And if I just distribute this,
this is equal to the square root, and we have our dt at the
end, of dx squared, or we could even write, dx over dt squared,
plus dy over dt squared. Right? dx squared over dt
squared is just dx over dt squared, same thing
with the y's. And now all of a sudden,
this starts to look pretty interesting. Let's substitute this
expression with this one. We said that these
are equivalent. And I'll switch colors,
just for the sake of it. So we have the integral. From t is equal to a. Let me get our drawing back, if
I from t is equal to a to t is equal to b of f of x of t
times, or f of x of t and f of, or and y of t, they're both
functions of t, and now instead of this expression, we can
write the square root of, well, what's dx, what's the change in
x with respect to, whatever this parameter is? What is dx dt? dx dt is the same thing
as g prime of t. Right? x is a function of t. The function I wrote
is g prime of t. And then dy dt is same
thing as h prime of t. We could say that, you
know, this function of t. So I just wanted to
make that clear. We know these two functions,
so we can just take their derivatives with respect to t. But I'm just going to
leave it in that form. So the square root, and we take
the derivative of x with respect to t squared, plus the
derivative of y with respect to t squared, and all
of that times dt. And this might look like some
strange and convoluted formula, but this is actually something
that we know how to deal with. We've now simplified this
strange, you know, this arc-length problem, or this
line integral, right? That's essentially
what we're doing. We're taking an integral over
a curve, or over a line, as opposed to just an
interval on the x-axis. We've taken the strange line
integral, that's in terms of the arc length of the line, and
x's and y's, and we've put everything in terms of t. And I'm going to show you that
in the next video, right? Everything is going to be
expressed in terms of t, so this just turns into a
simple, definite integral. So hopefully that didn't
confuse you too much. I think you're going to see in
the next video that this, right here, is actually a
very straightforward thing to implement. And just to remind you where
it all came from, I think I got the parentheses right. This right here was just a
change in our arc length. That whole thing right
there was just a change in arc length. And this is just the height of
our function at that point. And we're just summing it,
doing an infinite sum of infinitely small lengths. So this was a change in our
arc length times the height. This is going to have an
infinitely narrow width, and they're going to take an
infinite number of these rectangles to get the area of
this entire fence, or this entire curtain. And that's what this definite
integral will give us, and we'll actually apply
it in the next video. 

Transcript for: Line integral example 1 | Line integrals and Green's theorem | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
The last video was very
abstract in general, and I used you know, f of x
and g of t, and h of t. What I want to do in this video
is do an actual example. Let's say I have f of xy. Let's say that f of
xy is equal to xy. And let's say that we have
a path in the xy plane, or a curve in the xy plane. And I'm going to define my
curve by x being equal to cosine of t, and y being
equal to sine of t. And we're going to go from
you know, we have to define what are our boundaries in our
t and we're going to go from t is equal to 0 or t is going
to be greater than or equal to 0 and then less
than or equal to. We're going to deal in
radians, pi over 2. If this was degrees, that
would be 90 degrees. So that's our curve. And immediately you might
already know what this type of a curve looks like. And I'm going to draw that
really fast right here in and we'll try to visualize this. I've actually drafted
ahead of time so that we can visualize this. So this curve right here, if I
were to just draw it in the standard xy plane do that in
a different color so we can make the curve green; let's say
that is y, and this is right here x so when t is equal
to 0, x is going to be equal to cosine of 0. Cosine of 0 is 1, y is going to
be equal to sine of 0, which is 0, so t is equal to 0. We're going to be at x equal to
1, that's cosine of 0, and y is sine of 0, or y is going to
be 0, so we're going to be right there. That's what t is equal
to; t is equal to 0. When t is equal to pi of 2,
what's going to happen? Cosine of pie over 2
that's the angle; cosine of pi over 2 is 0. Sine of pi over 2 is 1. We're going to be
at the point 0, 1. So this is when we're at
t is equal to pi over 2. You might recognize what we're
going to draw is actually the first quadrant of the unit
circle; when t is equal to pi over 4, or 45 degrees, we're
going to be at square root of 2, square root of 2. You can try it out for
yourself, but we're just going to have a curve
that looks like this. It's going to be the
top right of a circle, of the units circle. It's going to have radius 1. And we're going to go in that
direction, from t is equal to 0, to t is equal to pi over 2. That's what this
curve looks like. But our goal isn't here just to
graph a parametric equation. What we want to do is raise a
fence out of this kind of base and rise it to this surface. So let's see if we can do that
or at least visualize it first, and then we'll use the tools
we used in the last video. So right here I've graphed this
function, and I've rotated it a little bit so you can
see [UNINTELLIGIBLE] case. This right here let me get
some dark colors out that right there is the x axis, that
in the back is the y axis, and the vertical axis
is the z axis. And this is actually 2, this
is 1 right here, y equal 1 is right there, so this
is graphed that way. So if I were to graphs this
contour in the xy plane, it would be under this graph and
it would go like something like this- let me see if I can
draw it it would look something like this. This would be on the xy plane. This is the same exact graph,
f of x is equal to xy. This is f of x; f of
xy is equal to xy. That's both of these,
I just rotated it. In this situation that right
there is now the x axis. I rotated to the left,
you can kind of imagine. That right there is the x axis,
that right there is the y axis it was rotated closer
to me that's the z axis. And then this curve, if I were
to draw in this rotation, is going to look like this: when t
is equal to 0, we're at x is equal to 1, y is equal to 0,
and it's going to form a unit circle, or half or quarter
of a unit circle like that. And when t is equal to pi over
2, we're going to get there. And what we want to do
is find the area of the curtain that's defined. So let's see, let's raise
a curtain from this curve up to f of xy. So if we keep raising walls
from this up to xy, we're going to have a wall looks
something like that. Let me shade it in, color
it in so it looks a little bit more substantive. So a wall that looks
something like that. If I were to try to do it here
this would be under the ceiling, but the wall
look something like that right there. We want to find
the area of that. We want to find the area of
this right here where the base is defined by this curves, and
then the ceiling is defined by this surface here, xy, which I
graphed and I rotated in two situations. Now in the last video we came
up with a, well, you could argue whether it's simple, but
the is, well, let's just take small arc lengths change in
arc lengths, and multiply them by the height at that point. And those small change in arc
lengths, we called them ds, and then the height is just
f of xy at that point. And we'll take an infinite sum
of these, from t is equal to 0 to t will equal pi over 2, and
then that should give us the area of this wall. So we said is, well, to figure
out the area of that we're just going to take the integral from
t is equal to o to t is equal to pi over 2 it doesn't make
a lot of sense when I write it like this of f of xy times
or let me even better, instead of writing f of xy, let me just
write the actual function. Let's get a little
bit more concrete. So f of xy is xy times so the
particular xy times the little change in our arc
length at that point. I'm going to be very
hand-wavy here. This is all a little bit
review of the last video. And we figured out in the last
video this change in arc length right here, ds, we figured out
that we could rewrite that as the square root of the dx
versus or the derivative of x with respect to t squared
plus the derivative of y with respect to t squared, and
then all of that times dt. So I'm just rebuilding
the formula that we got in the last video. So this expression can be
rewritten as the integral from t is equal to 0 to t is
equal to pi over 2 times xy. But you know what? Right from the get go we
want everything eventually be in terms of t. So instead of writing x
times y, let's substitute the parametric form. So instead of x let's
write cosine of t. That is x. x is equal to cosine
of t on this curve. That's how we define x, in
terms of the parameter t. And then times y, which
we're saying is sine of t. That's our y; all I
did is rewrote xy in terms of t times ds. ds is this; it's the square
root of the derivative of x with respect to t squared plus
the derivative of y with respect to t squared. All of that times dt. And now we just have to find
these two derivatives. And it might seem really hard,
but it's very easy for us to find the derivative of x with
respect to t and the derivative of y with respect to t. I can do it right or down here. Let me lose our graphs
for a little bit. We know that the derivative of
x with respect to t is just going to be: what's the
derivative of cosine of t? Well, it's minus sine of t. And the derivative of
y was respect to t? Derivative of a sine of
anything is the cosine of that anything. So it's cosine of t. And we can substitute these
back into this equation. So remember, we're just trying
to find the area of this curtain that has our curve here
as kind of its base, and has this function, this
surface as it's ceiling. So we go back down here,
and let me rewrite this whole thing. So this becomes the integral
from t is equal to o to t is equal to pi over 2 I don't
like this color of cosine of t, sine of t, cosine times
sine that's just the xy times ds, which is this
expression right here. And now we can write this as
I'll go switch back to that color I don't like the
derivative of x with respect to t is minus sine of t, and we're
going to square it, plus the derivative of y with respect to
t, that's cosine of t, and we're going to square it let
me make my radical a little bit bigger and then all
of that times dt. Now this still might seem like
a really hard integral until you realize that this right
here, and when you take a negative number and you squared
it, this is the same thing. Let me rewrite, do this
in the side right here. Minus sine of t squared plus
the cosine of t squared, this is equivalent to sine of t
squared plus cosine of t squared. You lose the sign information
when you square something; it just becomes a positive. So these two things
are equivalent. And this is the most
basic trig identity. This comes straight out of the
unit circle definition: sine squared plus cosine squared,
this is just equal to 1. So all this stuff under
the radical sign is just equal to 1. And we're taking the square
root of 1 which is just 1. So all of this stuff right
here will just become 1. And so this whole crazy
integral simplifies a good bit and just equals the square root
of t equals 0 to t is equal to pi over 2 of and I'm going to
switch these around just because it will make it a
little easier in the next step of sine of t times
cosine of t, dt. All I did, this whole thing
equals 1, got rid of it, and I just switched
the order of that. It'll make the next up a
little bit easier to explain. Now this integral You say
sine times cosine, what's the antiderivative of that? And the first thing you should
recognize is, hey, I have a function or an expression here,
and I have its derivative. The derivative of
sine is cosine of t. So you might be able to a u
substitution in your head; it's a good skill to be
able to do in your head. But I'll do it very
explicitly here. So if you have something
that's derivative, you define that something as u. So you say u is equal to sine
of t and then du, dt, the derivative of u with respect
to t is equal to cosine of t. Or if you multiply both sides
by the differential dt, if we're not going to be too
rigorous, you get du is equal to cosine of t, dt. And notice right
here I have a u. And then cosine of t, dt,
this thing right here, that thing is equal to d of u. And then we just have to
redefine the boundaries. When t is equal to 0 I mean
so this thing is going to turn into the integral instead of
t is equal to 0, when t is equal to 0 what is u equal to? Sine of 0 is 0, so this
goes from u is equal to 0. When t is pie over 2
sine of pi over 2 is 1. So when t is pi over
2, u is equal to 1. So from is equal to 0
to u is equal to 1. Just redid the boundaries
in terms of u. And then we have instead
of sign of t, I'm going to write u. And instead of cosine of t, dt,
I'm just going to write du. And then this is a super-easy
integral in terms of u. This is just equal to: the
antiderivative of u is u 1/2 times u squared we just
raised the exponent and then divided by that raised exponent
so 1/2 u squared, and we're going to evaluate
it from 0 to 1. And so this is going to be
equal to 1/2 times 1 squared minus 1/2 times 0 squared,
which is equal to 1/2 times 1 minus 0, which is equal to 1/2. So we did all that work and
we got a nice simple answer. The area of this a curtain we
just performed a line integral the area of this curtain
along this curve right here is let me do it in a
darker color on 1/2. You know, if this was in
centimeters, it would be 1/2 centimeters squared. So I think that was you know,
a pretty neat application of the line integral. 

Transcript for: Line integral example 2 (part 1) | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
So let's say I have a function
of x and y; f of x and y is equal to x plus y squared. If I try to draw that,
let's see if I can have a good attempt at it. That is my y axis I'm going
to do a little perspective here this is my x axis I make do
the negative x and y axis, could do it in that direction
this is my x axis here. And if I were to graph this
when y is 0, it's going to be just a let me draw it in
yellow is going to be just a straight line that looks
something like that. And then for any given
actually, we're going to have a parabola in y. y is going to look
something like that. I'm just going to it in
the positive quadrant. It's going to look
something like that. It'll actually, when you go
into the negative y, you're going to see the other half of
the parabola, but I'm not going to worry about it too much. So you're going to
have this surface. it looks something like that. Maybe I'll do to another
attempt at drawing it. But this is our ceiling we're
going to deal with again. And then I'm going to have
a path in the xy plane. I'm going to start at the
point 2 comma 0. x is equal to 2, y is 0. And I'm going to travel, just
like we did in the last video, I'm going to travel along a
circle, but this time the circle's going to
have of radius 2. Move counter clockwise
in that circle. This is on the xy plane,
just to be able to visualize it properly. So this right here's
a point 0, 2. And I'm going to come
back along the y axis. This is my path; I'm going to
come back along the y access and then so I look a left here,
and then I'm going to take another left here in and
come back along the x axis. I drew it in these
two shades of green. That is my contour. And what I want to do is I want
to evaluate the surface area of essentially this little
building that has the roof of f of xy is equal to x plus y
squared, and I want to find the surface area of its walls. So you'll have this wall right
here, whose base is the x axis. Then you're going to have this
wall, which is along the curve; it's going to look something
like kind of funky wall on that curved side right there. I'll try my best effort to
try to it's going to be curving way up like that
and then along the y axis. It's going to have like a half
a parabolic wall right there. I'll do that back wall
along the y axis. I'll do that in orange,
I'll use magenta. That is the back wall
along the y axis. Then you have this front
wall along the x axis. And then you have this weird
curvy curtain or wall do that maybe in blue that goes along
this curve right here, this part of a circle of radius 2. So hopefully you get
that visualization. It's a little harder; I'm
not using any graphic program at this time. But I want to figure out
the surface area, the combined surface area
of these three walls. And in very simple notation we
could say, well, the surface area of those walls of this
wall plus that wall plus that wall is going to be equal to
the line integral along this curve, or along this contour
however you want to call it of f of xy, so that's x
plus y squared ds, where ds is just a little length
along our contour. And since this is a closed
loop, we'll call this a closed line interval. And we'll sometimes see
this notation right here. Often you'll see that
in physics books. And we'll be dealing
with a lot more. And we'll put a circle
on the interval sign. And all that means is that the
contour we're dealing with is a closed contour; we get back
to where we started from. But how do we solve this thing? A good place to start
is to just to find the contour itself. And just to simply it, we're
going to divide it into three pieces and it essentially just
do three separate line integrals. Because you know, this isn't
a very continuous contour. so the first part. Let's do this first part of
the curve where we're going along a circle of radius 2. And that's pretty easy to
construct if we have x let me do each part of the contour in
a different color, so if I do orange this part of the contour
if we say that x is equal 2 cosine of t and y is equal to 2
sine of t and if we say that t and this is really just
building off what we saw on the last video if we say that t
and that this is from t is a greater than or equal to 0 and
is less than or equal to pi over 2 t is essentially going
to be the angle that we're going along the
circle right here. This will actually
describe this path. And if you know, how I
constructed this is little confusing, you might want
to review the video on parametric equations. So this is the first
part of our path. So if we just wanted to find
the surface area of that wall right there, we know we're
going to have to find dx, dt and dy, dt. So let's get that out
of the way right now. So if we say dx, dt is going to
be equal to minus 2, sine of t, dy, dy is going to be equal to
2 cosine of t; just the derivatives of these. We've seen that
many times before. So it we want this orange
wall's surface area, we can take the integral and if any
of this is confusing, there are two videos before this where we
kind of derive this formula but we could take the
integral from t is equal to 0 to pi over 2 our function of x
plus y squared and then times the ds. So x plus y squared will
give the height of each little block. And then we want to get the
width of each little block, which is ds, but we know that
we can rewrite the ds as the square root give myself some
room right here of dx of the derivative of x with respect to
t squared so that is minus 2 sine of t squared plus
the derivative of y with respect to t squared, dt. This will give us the orange
section, and then we can worry about the other two walls. And so how can we
simplify this? Well, this is going to be equal
to the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of x plus y squared. And actually, let me write
everything in terms of t. So x is equal to 2 cosine of t. So let me write that down. So it's 2 cosine of t plus y,
which is 2 sine of t, and we're going to square everything. And then all of that times
this crazy radical. Right now it looks like a hard
antiderivative or integral to solve, but I we'll find
out it's not too bad. This is going to be equal to
4 sine squared of t plus 4 cosine squared of t. We can factor a 4 out. I don't want to forget the dt. This over here let me just
simplify this expression so I don't have to keep
rewriting it. That is the same thing is
the square root of 4 times sine squared of t plus
cosine squared of t. We know what that
is: that's just 1. So this whole thing just
simplifies to the square root of 4, which is just 2. So this whole thing simplifies
to 2, which is nice for solving our antiderivative. That means simplifying
things a lot. So this whole thing simplifies
down to I'll do it over here. I don't want to waste too much
space; I have two more walls to figure out the integral from
t is equal to 0 to pi over 2. I want to make it very clear. I just chose the simplest
parametrization I could for x and y. But I could have picked
other parametrizations, but then I would have had to
change t accordingly. So as long as you're consistent
with how you do it, it should all work out. There isn't just one
parametrization for this curve; it's kind of depending on how
fast you want to go along the curve. Watch the parametric functions
videos if you want a little bit more depth on that. Anyway, this thing simplifies. We have a 2 here; 2 times
cosine of t, that's 4 cosine of t. And then here we have 2 sine
squared sine of t squared. So that's 4 sine squared of t. And then we have to multiply
times this 2 again, so that gives us an 8. 8 time sine squared of t, dt. And then you know, sine squared
of t; that looks like a tough thing to find the
antiderivative for, but we can remember that sine squared of,
really anything we could say sine squared of u is equal
to 1/2 half times 1 minus cosine of 2u. So we can reuse this identity. I can try the t here; sine
squared of t is equal to 1/2 times 1 minus cosine of 2t. Let me rewrite it that way
because that'll make the integral a lot easier to solve. So we get integral from 0 the
pi over 2 and actually I could break up, well I won't
break it up of 4 cosine of t plus 8 times this thing. 8 times this thing; this
is the same thing as sine squared of t. So 8 times this 8 times 1/2
is 4 4 times 1 minus cosine of 2t just use a little trig
identity there and all of that dt. Now this should be reasonably
straight forward to get the antiderivative of. Let's just take it. The antiderivative of this
is antiderivative of cosine of t; that's a sine of t. The derivative of
sine is cosine. So this is going to be 4 sine
of t the scalars don't affect anything and then, well let
me just distribute this 4. So this is 4 times 1 which
is 4 minus 4 cosine of 2t. So the antiderivative of 4 is
4t plus 4t and then the antiderivative of minus
4 cosine of u00b5 t? Let's see it's going
to be sine of 2t. The derivative of sine of
2t is 2 cosine of 2t. We're going to have to have a
minus sign there, and put a 2 there, and now it
should work out. What's the derivative
of minus 2 sine of t? Take the derivative of
the inside 2 times minus 2 is minus 4. And the derivative of sine
of 2t with respect to 2t is cosine of 2t. So there we go; we've figured
out our antiderivative. Now we evaluate it
from 0 the pi over 2. And what do we get? We get 4 sine let me write
this down, for I don't want to skip too many sine of pi over
2 plus 4 times pi over 2 that's just 2 pi minus 2 sine
of 2 times pi over 2 sine of pie, and then all of that minus
all this evaluated at 0. That's actually pretty
straightforward because sine of 0 is 0. 4 times 0 is 0, and sine of
2 times 0, that's also 0. So everything with the
0's work out nicely. And then what do we have here? Sine of pi over 2 in my head,
I think sine of 90 degrees; same thing that is 1. And then sine of pi is
0, that's 180 degrees. So this whole thing
cancels out. So we're left with 4 plus 2 pi. So just like that we were able
to figure out the area of this first curvy wall here,
and frankly, that's the hardest part. Now let's figure out the
area of this curve. And actually you're going to
find out that these other curves as they go along the
axes are much, much, much easier, but we're going to
have to find different parametrizations for this. So if we take this curve
right here, let's do a parametrization for that. Actually, you know what? Let me continue this in the
next video because I realize I've been running
a little longer. I'll do the next two walls and
then we'll sum them all up. 

Transcript for: Line integral example 2 (part 2) | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we set out
to figure out the surface area of the walls of this
weird-looking building, where the ceiling of the walls was
defined by the function f of xy is equal to x plus y squared,
and then the base of this building, or the contour of its
walls, was defined by the path where we have a circle of
radius 2 along here, then we go down along the y-axis, and then
we take another left, and we go along the x-axis, and
that was our building. And in the last video, we
figured out this first wall's surface area. In fact, you can think of it,
our original problem is, we wanted to figure out the line
integral along the closed path, so it was a closed line
integral, along the closed path c of f of xy, and we're always
multiplying f of xy times a little bit, a little, small
distance of our path, ds. We're writing this in the
most abstract way possible. And what we saw in the last
video is, the easiest way to do this is to break this up into
multiple paths, or into multiple problems. So you can imagine, this whole
contour, this whole path we call c, but we could call this
part, we figured out in the last video, c1. This part we can call, let me
make a pointer, c2, and this point right here is c3. So we could redefine, or we can
break up, this line integral, this closed-line integral, into
3 non-closed line integrals. This will be equal to the line
integral along the path c1 of f of xy ds, plus the line
integral along c2 of f of x y ds plus the line integral, you
might have guessed it, along c3 of f of xy ds, and in the last
video, we got as far as figuring out this first part,
this first curvy wall all right here. Its surface area, we figured
out, was 4 plus 2 pi. Now we've got to figure
out the other 2 parts. So let's do C2, let's do
this line integral next. And in order to do it,
we need to do another parameterization of x and y. It's going to be different than
what we did for this part. We're no longer along
this circle, we're just along the y-axis. So as long as we're there,
x is definitely going to be equal to 0. So that's my parameterization,
x is equal to 0. If we're along the y-axis, x
is definitely equal to 0. And then y, we could say it
starts off at y is equal to 2. Maybe we'll say y is equal to 2
minus t, for t is between 0, t is greater than or equal to
0, less than or equal to 2. And that should work. When t is equal to 0, we're at
this point right there, and then as t increases towards 2,
we move down the y-axis, until eventually when t is equal
to 2, we're at that point right there. So that's our parameterization. And so let's evaluate this
line, and we could do our derivatives, too, if we like. What's the derivative,
I'll write it over here. What's dx dt? Pretty straightforward. Derivative of 0 is 0, and
dy dt is equal to the derivative of this. It's just minus 1, right? 2 minus t, derivative of
minus t, is just minus 1. And so let's just break it up. So we have this thing right
here, so we have the integral along c2. But let's, instead of writing
c2, I'll leave c2 there, but we'll say were going from t is
equal to 0 to 2 of f of xy. f of xy is this thing right
here, is x plus y squared, and then times ds. And we know from the last
several videos, ds can be rewritten as the square root of
dx dt squared, so 0 squared, plus dy dt squared, so minus 1
squared is 1, all of that times dt. And obviously, this is
pretty nice and clean. This is 0 plus 1, square
root, this just becomes 1. And then what is x? x, if we write it in terms of
our parameterization, is always going to be equal to 0, and
then y squared is going to be 2 minus is t squared. So this is going to be
2 minus t squared. So this whole crazy thing
simplified to, we're going to go from t is equal to 0 to t is
equal to 2, the x disappears in our parameterization, x just
stays 0, regardless of what t is, and then you have y
squared, but y is the same thing as 2 minus t, so 2 minus
t squared, and then you have your dt sitting out there. This is pretty straightforward. I always find it easier when
you're finding an antiderivative of this,
although you can do this in your head, I like to
just actually multiply out this binomial. So this is going to be equal to
the antiderivative from t is equal to 0 to t is equal to 2
of 4 minus 2 minus 4t plus t squared, plus t squared,
just like that dt. And this is pretty
straightforward. This is going to be, the
antiderivative of this is 4 t minus 2 t squared, right? When you take the derivative,
there's 2 times minus 2 is minus 4 t, and then you have
plus 1/3 t to the third, right? These are just simple
antiderivatives, and we need to evaluate it from 0 to 2. And so let's evaluate it at 2. 4 times 2 is 8, let
me pick a new color. 4 times 2 is 8, minus 2 times 2
squared, so 2 times 4, so minus 8, plus 1/3 times 2
to the third power. So 1/3 times 8. So these cancel out. We have 8 minus 8, and
we just have 8/3. So this just becomes 8/3. And then we have to put a 0 in,
minus 0 evaluate here, but it's just going to be 0. We have 4 times 0, two times 0,
all of these are going to be 0. So minus 0. So just like that, we
found our surface area of our second wall. This turned out being,
this right here is 8/3. And now we have our last
wall, and then we can just add them up. So we have our last wall. I'll do another
parameterization. I want to have the graph there. Well, maybe I can
paste it again. Edit. So there's the graph again. And now we're going
to do our last wall. So our last wall is this one
right here, which is, we could write it, you
know, this was c3. Let me switch colors here. So this is c, we're going to go
along contour c3 of f of xy ds, which is the same thing as,
let's do a parameterization. Along this curve, if we just
say, x is equal to t, very straight forward, for t is
greater than or equal to 0, less than or equal to 2, and
this whole time that we're along the x-axis, y is
going to be equal to 0. That's pretty straightforward
parameterization. So this is going to be equal
to, we're going to go from t is equal to 0 to t is equal to 2
of f of xy, which is, I'll write in terms of x right now,
x and y, x plus y squared times ds. Now, what is dx well, let
me write ds right here. Times ds. That's what we're dealing with. Now we know what ds is. ds is equal to the square
root of dx dt squared plus dy dt squared times dt. We proved that in
the first video. Or we didn't rigorously prove
it, but we got the sense of why this is true. And what's the derivative
of x with respect to t? Well, that's just 1, so this
is just going to be a 1, 1 squared, same thing. And the derivative of y
with respect to z is 0. So this is is 0, 1 plus 0 is
1, square root of 1 is 1. So this thing just becomes dt. ds is going to be equal
to dt, in this case. So this just becomes a dt. And then our x is going to be
equal to a t, that's part of our definition of our
parameterization, and y is zero, so we can ignore it. So this was a
super-simple integral. So this simplified down to,
we're going to go from 0 to 2 of t dt, which is equal to the
antiderivative of t is just 1/2 t squared, and we're going to
go 0 to 2, which is equal to 1/2 times 2 squared. 2 squared is 4, times 1/2
is 2, and then minus 1/2 times 0 squared, minus 0. So this third wall's area
right there is just 2. Pretty straightforward. So that right there, the
area there, is just 2. And so to answer our question,
what was this line integral evaluated over this
closed path of f of xy? Well, we just add
up these numbers. We have 4 plus 2 pi plus 8/3
plus 2, well, what is this. 8/3 is same thing as 2 and 2/3,
so we have 4 plus 2 and 2/3 is 6 and 2/3, plus another 2 is 8
and 2/3, so this whole thing becomes 8 and 2/3, if we
write it as a mixed number, plus 2 pi. And we're done! And we're done. Now we can start trying to
do line integrals with vector-valued functions. 

Transcript for: Position vector valued functions | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
All of the work we've been
doing so far with line integrals has been with
scalar functions or scalar-valued functions. And when I say that, that just
means you give me an x and a y and you evaluate the function
at that x and y, and you get another scalar value. You get just a number. You don't get a vector. So what I want to do in this
video is start to get ourselves warmed up with regards to
vectors so that we can understand what it means to
take a line integral with vector-valued functions. So let me write down some
vector-valued functions. Actually, even a better place
to start, let me draw a curve or let me describe a curve. So let's put that little
f of x, y to the side. We can ignore it for now. Let's say I have some curve c
and it's described, it can be parameterized I can't say
that word as let's say, x is equal to x of t, y is equal
to some function y of t. And let's say that this is
valid for t is between a and b. So t is greater than or
equal to a and then, less than or equal to b. So if I were to just draw
this on let me see I could draw it like this. I'm staying very
abstract right now. This is not a very
specific example. This is the x-axis. This is the y-axis. My curve let's say this
is when t is equal to a. And then the curve might
do something like this. I don't know what it does. Let's say it's over there. This is t is equal to b. This actual point right
here will be x of b. That would be the x-coordinate. You evaluate this function
at b and y of b. And this is, of course,
when t is equal to a. The actual coordinate in r2 on
the Cartesian coordinates will be x of a, which is
this right here. And then, y of a, which
is that right there. And we've seen that before. That's just a standard way
of describing a parametric equation or curve using
2 parametric equations. What I want to do now is
describe this same exact curve using a vector-valued function. So if I define a vector-valued
function and if you don't remember what those are, we'll
have a little bit of review here. Let me say I have a
vector-valued function, r, and I'll put a little
vector arrow on top of it. And a lot of textbooks, they'll
just bold it and they'll leave scalar-valued
functions unbolded. But it's hard to draw bold,
so I'll put a little vector on top. And let's say that r
is a function of t. And these are going to
be position vectors. And I'm specifying that
because, in general, when someone talks about a vector,
this vector and this vector are considered equivalent. As long as they have the same
magnitude and direction, no one really cares about what their
start and end points are as long as their direction's
the same and their length is the same. But when you talk about
position vectors you're saying no, these vectors are all going
to start at 0, at the origin. And when you say it's a
position vector, you're implicitly saying this is
specifying a unique position. In this case, it's going
to be in two-dimensional space, but it could be in
three-dimensional space. Or really, even four, five,
whatever n dimensional space. So when you say it's a position
vector, you're literally saying, OK, this vector
literally specifies that point in space. So let's see if we can describe
this curve as a position vector-valued function. So we could say r of t. Let me switch back
to that pink color. This can stay in green. Is equal to x of t times the
unit vector in the x direction. The unit vector gets a little
caret on top a little hat. That's like the arrow for it. That just says it's
a unit vector. Plus y of t times j. If I was dealing with a curve
in three dimensions I would have plus z of t times k. But we're dealing with two
dimensions right here. And so the way this works is
you're just taking your well, for any t and still, we're
going to have t is greater than or equal to a and then,
less than or equal to b. And this is the exact
same thing as that. Let me just redraw it. So let me draw our coordinates. Our coordinates right
here, our axes. So that's the y-axis and
this is the x-axis. So when you evaluate r of a,
that's our starting point. So let me do that. So r of a maybe I'll
do it right over here. Our position vector-valued
function evaluated at t is equal to a, is going to be
equal to x of a times our unit vector in the x direction. Plus y of a times our unit
vector in the vertical direction, or in
the y direction. And what's that
going to look like? Well, x of a is this thing
right here, so it's x of a times a unit vector. You know, maybe the unit
vector is this long. It has length 1, so now we're
just going to have a length of x of a in that direction. And then, same thing in y of a. It's going to be y of a
length in that direction. But the bottom line, this
vector right here if you add these scaled values of these
two unit vectors, you're going to get r of a looking
something like this. it's going to be a vector that
looks something like that. Just like that. It's a position vector. That's why we're nailing it
at the origin, but drawing it in standard position. And that right there is r of a. Now what happens if a
increases a little bit? What is r of a plus
a little bit? And I don't know, we could
call that r of a plus delta or r of a plus h. I'll do it in a
different color. Let's say we increase a
a little bit. r of a plus some small h. Well, that's just going to
be x of a plus h times a unit vector i. Plus y times a plus h
times the unit vector j. And what's that
going to look like? Well, we're going to go
a little bit further down the curve. That's like saying the
coordinate x of a plus h and y plus a plus h. I might be that
point right there. So it'll be a new unit vector. Sorry, it'll be a new
vector position vector not a unit vector. These don't necessarily
have length 1. That might be right here. Let me do that same
color as this. So it might be just like that. So that right here
is r of a plus h. So you see, as you keep
increasing you value of t until you get to b, these position
vectors we're going to keep specifying points
along this curve. So the curve let me draw the
curve in a different color. The curve looks
something like this. It's meant to look exactly like
the curve that I have up here. And for example, r of b
is going to be a vector that looks like this. It's going to be a vector
that looks like that. I want to draw it
relatively straight. That vector right
there is r of b. So hopefully you realize that,
look, these position vectors really are specifying the same
points on this curve as this original, I guess, straight
up parameterization that we did for this curve. And I just wanted to that as a
little bit of review because we're now going to break in
into the idea of actually taking a derivative of this
vector-valued function. And I'll do that in
the next video. 

Transcript for: Derivative of a position vector valued function | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we hopefully
got ourselves a respectable understanding of how a
vector-valued function works, or even better, a position
vector-valued function, that is, in some ways, a
replacement for traditional parameterization to
describe a curve. And what I want to do in this
video is just get a little bit of gut sense of what it means
to take of a derivative of a vector-valued function. In this case, it'll be with
respect to our parameter t. So let me draw some
new stuff right here. So let's say I have the
vector-valued function r of t, and this is no different than
what I did in last video. x of t times unit vector i plus y of
t times the unit vector j. If we were doing it in 3
dimensions, we'd add a z of t times k, but let's keep things
relatively simple, and let's say that this describes a
curve, and let's say the curve we're dealing with, t is
between a and b, and this curve will look something like, let
me do my best effort to draw the curve, I'll just draw some
random curve here, so let's say the curve looks
something like that. This is when t is equal
to a, so it's going to go in this direction. This is when t is equal to b
right here, this is t is equal to a, so this right here would
be x of a, this right here is y of a, and similarly, this up
here, this is x of b, and this over here is y of b. Now, we saw in the last video
that the endpoints of these position vectors are what's
describing this curve. So r of a we saw in the
last video, it describes that point right there. I don't want to review
that too much. But what I want to do is
think about, what is the difference between 2 points? So let's say that we take
some random point here. Let's say, some random t here. Let's call that r of t. Well actually, I'm going to do
a different point, just because I want to make it a
little bit clearer. So let's say I'm going to
switch colors let's say that that right there
is r of some t. Some particular t, right there. That is r of t. It's going to be, you
know, a plus something. So that's some a particular t. And let's say that we want to
figure out, and let's say we increase t by a little bit. By h. So let's say that r of t plus
h, well, if we view the parameter t as time, we've
moved in forward in time by some amount, so our little
particle has moved a little bit. And let's say that
we're over here. So that is that right there,
in yellow, is r of t plus h. Just a slightly
larger value for h. Now, one question we might ask
ourselves, is how quickly is r changing with respect to t? So the first thing we might
want to say, well, what's the difference between these two? If I were to take, and I
want to visualize it. If I were to take r, the
position vector, that we get by evaluating r at t plus h, and
from that, I would subtract r of t. What do we get? Well, you might want to review
some of your vector algebra but we're essentially just
going to get this vector. Let me do it in a
nice, vibrant color. We're going to get this
vector right there, that I'm doing in magenta. So that magenta vector right
there is, let me do it, that magenta one right there,
is the vector r of t plus h minus r of t. And it should make sense,
because when you add vectors, you go heads to tails. You could alternatively write
this as r of t plus this character right here, plus r
of t plus h minus r of t. When you add two vectors,
you're adding, let me make it very clear, I'm adding
this vector to this vector right here. You put the tail of the
second vector at the head of the first. So this is the first vector,
and I put the tail of the second there, and then the sum
of those two, as we predicted, should be equal to
this last one. It should be equal
to r of t plus h. And we see that is the case,
and algebraically, you would see that obviously this
guy and that guy are going to cancel out. So hopefully that
satisfies you. And I want to be clear. This, all of a sudden, this
isn't a position vector. We're not saying that hey,
let's nail this guy's tail at the origin and use this guy to
describe a unique position. Now all of a sudden he's, it's
just kind of a pure vector. It's describing just
a change between two other position vectors. So this guy is right out here. But this vector literally
describes the change. But say we care, and how would
this look algebraically if we were to expand it like that? So this is going to be equal
to, what's r of t plus h? That's the same thing as x
of, let me do it over here. This is the same thing as x of
t plus h times the unit vector i plus y of t plus h times the
unit vector j, that's just that piece, that piece right there
is that piece, minus this piece, so minus, I'll do it in
the second line, I could have done it out here, but I'm
running out of space. Minus x of t, right r of t is
just x of t times i, plus, but I'll just distribute the minus
sign, so it's minus y of t times j. Actually let me write it,
this would be minus, let me write this way, plus this. So you realize that this
is really just this guy right here. I'm just evaluating at t. So you have x of t and y
of t, and then later we can distribute, right? If you distribute this minus
sign, you get a minus x of t and a minus y of t. And in vector addition, you
might need a little review on this if you haven't seen it in
a while, you know that you can just add the corresponding
components. You can add the x-components
and you can add the y-components. So this is going to be equal
to, let me rewrite it over here, because I think I'm going
to need some space later on. So let me rewrite it over here. So I have r of t plus h minus r
of t is equal to, and I'm just going to group the x- and the
y-components, this is equal to the x-components added
together, but this is a negative, so we're going to
subtract this guy from that guy. So x of t plus h minus x of t,
and then all of that times our unit vector in the x-direction,
and then we'll have plus y of t plus h minus y of t times a
unit vector the j-direction, I'm just rearranging things
right now, and this will tell us what is our change between
any 2 r's for given change in distance. And our change in distance
here is h between any 2 position vectors. Now, what I set out at the
beginning of this video, I said, well, I wanted to figure
out the change, and we're going to think about the
instantaneous change with respect to t. So I want to see, well,
how much did this change over a period of h? Instead of writing h we could
have written delta t, it would've been the same thing. So I want to divide this by h. So I want to say, look. My vectors changed this much,
but I want to say it's over a period of h. And this is analogous
to when we do slope. We say rise over run, over
delta y, or change in y, over change in x. This is kind of the change in
our function per change in x. Let's just divide everything,
or I shouldn't say change x, per change in t. So here, our change
in t is h, right? The difference between t plus h
and t is just going to be h. And so we're going to
divide everything by h. When you multiply a vector by
some scalar, or divide it by some scalar, or you're just the
taking each of its components and multiplying or dividing
by that scalar, and we get that right there. So this, for any finite
difference right here, h, this'll tell us how much
our vector changes per h. But if we want to find the
instantaneous change, right, just like what we did when we
first learned differential calculus, we said, ok. This is kind of
analogous to a slope. This would be good, this would
work out well for us, if the path under question looked
something like this. If it was a linear path. If our path looked
something like this. We could just calculate this,
and we'll essentially have the average change in our position
vectors, so you could imagine, 2 position vectors,
that's one of them. Well, actually, they'd
all be parallel. Well, the position vectors,
they don't have to be parallel. They could be like that. And then, this would just
describe the change between these 2 per h, or how quickly
are the position vectors changing per our change
in our parameter, right? This is, the h, you could also
consider, is kind of a delta t. Sometimes people find the
h simpler, or sometimes they find the delta t. But anyway, I'm concerned
with the instantaneous. We're dealing with curves,
we're dealing with calculus. This would have been OK
if we were just in an algebraic, linear world. So what do we do? Well maybe, we can just take
the limit as h approaches 0. Let me scroll this over. So let's just take the limit,
let me do this in a nice vibrant color, let's take, I'm
running out of colors, the limit as h approaches 0
of both sides of this. So here, too, I'm going to take
the limit as h approaches 0, and here, too, I'm going to
take the limit as h approaches 0. So I just want to say, well,
what happens, how much do I change per a change in my
parameter t, but what's kind of the instantaneous change, as
the difference gets smaller and smaller and smaller? This is exactly what we first
learned when we learned about instantaneous slope, or
instantaneous velocity, or slope of a tangent line. Well, this thing looks a little
bit undefined to me, right now. We haven't defined limits for
vector-valued functions, we haven't defined derivatives
for vector-valued functions. But lucky for us, all of
this stuff here looks pretty familiar. This is actually the
definition of our derivative. And these are scalar-valued
functions right here. They're multiplied by vectors,
in order for us to get vector-valued functions. But this right here, by
definition, this is the derivative, this
is x prime of t. Or this is dx dt. This right here is y
prime of t, or we could write that as dy dt. So all of a sudden we can
define, we can say, and I'm being a little hand-wavy here,
but I want to give you the intuition, more than anything. We can say that the derivative,
we can call this expression right here, as the derivative
of my vector-valued function r with respect to t, or we could
call it dr dt, notice I keep the vector signs there. This is its derivative, and all
it's going to be equal to, r prime of t, is going to be
equal to, well, this is just the derivative of x with
respect to t, is equal to x prime of t times the x-unit
vector, the horizontal unit vector, plus y prime of t,
times the y-unit vector, times j, the unit vector in the
horizontal direction. That's a pretty nice
and simple outcome. But the hard thing may be
to a kind of visualize what it represents. So if we think about what
happens, let me draw a big graph, just to get the
visualization in a healthy way. So let's say my curve looks
something like this. That's my curve. And let's say that this is,
we want to figure out the instantaneous change at
this point right here. So that is r of t. And then if we take r of t plus
h, we saw this already, you know, t plus h might be
something like right there. So this is r of t plus h. Right now, the difference
between these two, and this is just the numerator when you
take the difference, or how fast we're changing from this
vector to that vector in terms of t, and it's hard
to visualize here. And I'm going to do a whole
video so we can think about the magnitudes here. That might be some vector. Well, the difference
between these two is just going to be that. But then when you divide it by
h, it's going to be a larger vector, right, if we assume
that h is a small number. Let's say h is less than one. We're going to get a
larger vector, right? But this is kind of the average
change over this time. But as h gets smaller and
smaller and smaller, this r prime of t is going to, its
direction is going to be tangential to the curve. And I think you can
visualize that, right? As these two guys get closer
and closer and closer, the dr's get smaller, so the change, the
dr, the difference between the two, the delta r's, get smaller
and smaller, you can imagine if h was even smaller, if
it was right here. Then all of a sudden, the
difference between those two vectors is getting smaller. And it's getting more and more
tangential to the curve. But then we're also dividing by
a smaller h, so the actual derivative, as the limit of h
approaches 0, it might be you know, maybe it's even a
bigger number there. And actually, the magnitude
of this vector, it's a little hard to visualize. It's going to be dependent our
parameterization for the curve. it's not dependent on
the shape of the curve. The direction of this vector is
dependent on the shape of this curve, and the direction, so
the direction, this will be tangent to the curve. Or you could imagine that this
vector is on the tangent line to the curve. The magnitude of it is a little
bit hard to understand. I'll try to give you a
little bit of intuition on that in the next video. But this is what I want you to
understand right now, because we're going to be able to use
this in the future, when we do the line integral over
vector-valued functions. 

Transcript for: Differential of a vector valued function | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last couple of videos
we saw that we can describe a curves by a position
vector-valued function. And in very general terms, it
would be the x position as a function of time times
the unit vector in the horizontal direction. Plus the y position as a
function of time times the unit victor in the
vertical direction. And this will essentially
describe this though, if you can imagine a particle and
let's say the parameter t represents time. It'll describe where the
particle is at any given time. And if we wanted a particular
curve we can say, well, this only applies for some curve
we're dealing, it's r of t. And it's only applicable
between t being greater than a and less than b. And you know, that would
describe some curve in two dimensions. Just me just draw it here. This is all a review of
really, the last two videos. So this curve, it might look
something like that where this is where t is equal to a. That's where t is equal to b. And so r of a will be this
vector right here that ends at that point. And then as t or if you can
imagine the parameter being time, it doesn't have to be
time, but that's a convenient one to visualize. Each corresponding as t gets
larger and larger, we're just going to different we're
specifying different points on the path. We saw that two videos ago. And in the last video we
thought about, well, what does it mean to take the derivative
of a vector-valued function? And we came up with this idea
that and it wasn't an idea, we actually showed
it to be true. We came up with a
definition really. That the derivative I could
call it r prime of t and it's going to be a vector. The derivative of a
vector-valued function is once again going to be a derivative. But it was equal to the way
we defined it x prime of t times i plus y prime
of t times j. Or another way to write that
and I'll just write all the different ways just so
you get familiar with dr/dt is equal to dx/dt. This is just a
standard derivative. x of t is a scalar function. So this is a standard
derivative times i plus dy/dt times j. And if we wanted to think about
the differential, one thing that we can think about and
whenever I do the math for the differential it's a
little bit hand wavy. I'm not being very rigorous. But if you imagine multiplying
both sides of the equation by a very small dt or this exact dt,
you would get dr is equal to I'll just leave it like this. dx/dt times dt. I could make these cancel
out, but I'll just write it like this first. Times the unit vector i
plus dy/dt times dt. Times the unit vector j. Or we could rewrite this. And I'm just rewriting it in
all of the different ways that one can rewrite it. You could also write this as dr
is equal to x prime of t dt times the unit vector i. So this was x prime of t dt. This is x prime of t right
there times the unit vector i. Plus y prime of t. That's just that right there. Times dt. Times the unit vector j. And just to, I guess, complete
the trifecta, the other way that we could write this is
that dr is equal to if we just allowed these to cancel
out, then we get is equal to dx times i plus dy
times dy y times j. And that actually makes a
lot of intuitive sense. That if I look at any dr,
so let's say I look at the change between this
vector and this vector. Let's say the super small
change right there, that is our dr, and it's made up of it's
our dx, our change in x is that right there. You can imagine it's that right
there times but we're vectorizing it by multiplying
it by the unit vector in the horizontal direction. Plus dy times the unit vector
in the vertical direction. So when you multiply this
distance times the unit vector, you're essentially
getting this vector. And when you multiply this
guy and actually our change in y here is negative
you're going to get this vector right here. So when you add those together
you'll get your change in your actual position vector. So that was all a little
bit of background. And this might be somewhat
useful a future video from now. Actually, I'm going to leave it
there because really I just wanted to introduce this
notation and get you familiar with it. In the next video, what I'm
going to do is give you a little bit more intuition
for what exactly does this thing mean? And how does it change
depending on different parameterizations. And I'll do it with two
different parameterizations for the same curve. 

Transcript for: Vector valued function derivative example | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
What I want to do in this
videos is to make to parametrizations of essentially
the same curve, but we're going to go along the curve
a different rates. And hopefully we'll be able to
use that to understand, or get a better intuition, behind what
exactly it means to take a derivative of a position
vector valued function. So let's say my first
parametrization, I have x of t is equal to t. And let's say that y of t
is equal to t squared. And this is true for t is
greater than or equal to 0, and less than or equal to 2. And if I want to write this
as a position vector valued function, let me write this. x1, call that y1, and let me
write my position vector valued function; I could say r1 I'm
numbering them because I'm going to do a different version
of this exact same curve with a slightly different
parametrization so r1 one of t, we could say is x1 of t
times i the unit vector i so we'll just say t times i
plus this is just x of t right here, or x1 of t; I'm
numbering them because I'll later have an x2 t plus
t squared times j. And if I wanted to graph this,
I'm going to be very careful graphing it because I really
want to understand what the derivative means here. Try to draw it
roughly to scale. So let's say that this is
one, two, three, four. Then let me draw my x-axis. That's good enough. And my x-axis, I want it to be
roughly to scale, one and two. And so at t equals 0, both my x
and y coordinates are at 0 or this is just going to be the 0
vector, so this is where we are a t equals 0 at t equals 1
this is going to be one times i we're going to be just
like that plus 1 times j. 1 squared is j, so we're
going to be right there. And then at t is equal to 2,
we're going to be at 2i. So 2i you could imagine 2
times i would be this vector right there 2 times i plus
4 2 squared is 4 4 times j, so plus 4 times j. If you add these two vectors
heads to tails, you're going to get a vector that's
end point is right there. The vector is going to
look something like this. So this is what, just to
make it clear what we're doing, that's r1 of 2. This is r1 of 0. This is r1 of 1. But the bottom line is the
path looks like this: it's a parabola. So the path will
look like that. Now that's in my first
parametrization of it. Actually, let me draw a
little bit more carefully. I want to get rid of this
arrows, just because I want it to be a nice clean drawing. So it's going to be a parabola. Let me get rid of that other
point, too, just because I didn't draw it exactly where
it needs to be; it needs to be right there. And my parabola, or part of
my parabola is going to look something like that. All right. Good enough. So this is the first
parametrization. Now I'm going to do this exact
same curve, but I'm going to do it slightly differently. So let's say I'll do it
in different colors. So x2 of t, let's it equals 2t. And y2 of t, let's say
it's equal to 2t squared. Or we could alternatively write
that, that's the same thing as 4t squared, just phrasing
both of these guys to the second power. And then let's say instead of
going from t equals 0 to 2, we're going to go from
t goes from 0 to 1. But we're going to see,
we're going to cover the exact same path. And our second position vector
valued function, r2 of t, is going to be equal to 2t times i
plus I could say 2t squared 4t squared times j. And if I were to graph this guy
right here, it would look like let me draw my axes
again; it's going to look the same, but it's I think useful
to draw it because I'm going to draw the derivatives and
all that on it later. One, two, three, four. One, two. And then let's see what happens
when t is equal to 0 or r of 0; all these are going to be 0,
we're just going to have the zero vector; x and y are both
equal to 0 when t is equal to 1/2 what are we
going to get here? 1/2 times 2 is 1. And then we're going to
get the point 1/2 squared is 1/4 times 4 is 1. So when t is equal 1/2 we're
going to be at the point 1, 1. And when the t is equal
to 1 we're going to be at the point 2, 4. So notice the curve is
exactly, the path we go is exactly the same. But before we even do the
derivatives, these two paths are identical. I want to think
about something. Let's pretend that our
parameter, t, really is time. And that tends to be the
most common, that's why they call it t. It doesn't have to be time,
but let's say it is time. So what's happening here? In the first parametrization
when we go from 0 to 2 seconds we cover this path. You can imagine after 1
second the dot moves here, then it moves there. You can imagine a dot moving
along this curve, and it takes two seconds to do so. In this situation we have a dot
moving along the same curve, but it's able to cover the same
curve in only one second; and half a second it gets here. It took this guy one
second to get here. In a one second, this guy's all
the way over here; this guy takes two seconds
to go over here. So in this second
parametrization even though the path is the same, the curves
are the same, the dot is faster. I want you to keep that in
mind when we think about the derivatives of both
of these position vector valued functions. So just remember the dot is
moving faster for every second it's getting further along the
curve than here; that's why it only took them one second. Now let's look at the
derivatives of both of these guys. So the derivative here, so if I
were to write r prime, r1 prime of t let me do that in a
different color, actually, already used the orange; so let
me do it in the blue r1 prime us t. So the is the derivative now. It's going to be, remember,
it's just the derivative of each of these times
the unit vectors. So the derivative of t with
respect to t, that's just 1. So it's 1 times i. I'll just write 1i plus I
didn't have to write the one there plus the derivative
of t squared with respect to t is 2t plus 2t j. And let me take the
derivative over here. r2 prime of t. The derivative of 2t with
respect to t is 2, so 2i, plus the derivative
of 4t squared is 8t. 2 times 4, it is rt. Just like that. Now the question is, what do
their respective derivative vectors look like at
different points? So let's look at, I don't know,
let's see how fast they're moving when time is equal to 1. So let's take it at
a specific point. This is just the general
formula, but let's figure out what the derivative
is at a specific point. So let's take r1 when
time is equal to 1. And I want to take this
specific point on the curve, not the specific point in time. So this point on the curve
here is when time is equal to 1, you could say second. This point over here, which
is the exact corresponding point, is when time
is equal 1/2 second. So r1 of 1 is equal to
we're taking the derivative there is equal to 1i. It's not dependent on t at all. So it's 1i plus 2
times 1j, so plus 2j. So at this point the derivative
of our position vector function is going to be 1i plus 2j. So we can draw it like this. so
if we do 1i is like this: 1i. And then 2j. Just 2j is like that. So our derivative right there,
I'll do it in the same color that I wrote it in. It's in this green color; it's
going to look like this. And notice it looks like, at
least its direction is let me do it a little bit straighter
its direction looks tangent to the curve; it's going in
the direction that my particle is moving. Remember my particle is moving
from here to there, so it's going in the direction. And I'm going to think about,
in a second, what this length of this to derivative
vector is. This right here, just to
be clear is, r1 prime. It's a vector, so it's telling
us the instantaneous change in our position vector with
respect to t, or time, when time is equal to 1 second. That's this thing right here. Now let's take the exact same
position here on our curve. But that's going to occur at a
different time for this guy. We already said it only takes
him, he's here at time is equal to 1/2 second. So let's take I'll
do it in the same color so here we have r2. We're going to evaluate it at
1/2 half because this is at time is equal 1/2 second. And this is going to be equal
to 2i this isn't dependent at all on time so 2i
plus 8 times the time. So time right here is 1/2. So 8 times 1/2 is 4. So plus 4j. So what does this look like? The instantaneous
derivative here. Oh, and this is the derivative;
have to be very clear. So 2i let me draw some
more so 2i maybe gets us about that far. Plus 4j will get us up
to right around there. Plus 4j is that factor. So when you add those two heads
to tails, you get this thing: you get something that let me
like you get something that looks like that. I didn't draw it as neatly
as I would like to. But let's notice something:
both of these vectors are going in the exact same direction. They're both tangential to
the path, to our curve. But this vector is going, its
length, its magnitude, is much larger than this
vector's magnitude. And that makes sense because I
hinted at it when we first talked about these vector
valued position functions and their derivatives; is that the
length, you can kind of view it as the speed. The length is equal to the
speed if you imagine t being time and these parametrizations
are representing a dot moving along these curves. So in this case, the particle
only takes a second to go there, so at this point in its
path, it's moving much faster than this particle is. So if you think about it, this
vector right here, if you imagine this is a position
factor, this is velocity. Velocity is speed
plus the direction. Speed is just you know,
how fast are you going? Velocity is how fast you're
going in what direction? I'm going this fast and you
could calculate it using the Pythagorean Theorem, but I just
want to give you the intuition right here I'm going that
fast in this direction. Here I'm going this fast;
I'm going even faster. That's my magnitude,
but I'm still going in the same direction. So hopefully you have a gut
feeling now of what the derivative of these position
vectors really are. 

Transcript for: Line integrals and vector fields | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
One of the most fundamental
ideas in all of physics is the idea of work. Now when you first learn work,
you just say, oh, that's just force times distance. But then later on, when you
learn a little bit about vectors, you realize that the
force isn't always going in the same direction as
your displacement. So you learn that work is
really the magnitude, let me write this down, the magnitude
of the force, in the direction, or the component of the force
in the direction of displacement. Displacement is just distance
with some direction. Times the magnitude of the
displacement, or you could say, times the distance displaced. And the classic example. Maybe you have an ice cube,
or some type of block. I just ice so that there's
not a lot of friction. Maybe it's standing on a bigger
lake or ice or something. And maybe you're pulling on
that ice cube at an angle. Let's say, you're pulling
at an angle like that. That is my force, right there. Let's say my force is
equal to well, that's my force vector. Let's say the magnitude of
my force vector, let's say it's 10 newtons. And let's say the direction of
my force vector, right, any vector has to have a magnitude
and a direction, and the direction, let's say it has a
30 degree angle, let's say a 60 degree angle, above horizontal. So that's the direction
I'm pulling in. And let's say I displace it. This is all review, hopefully. If you're displacing it, let's
say you displace it 5 newtons. So let's say the displacement,
that's the displacement vector right there, and the magnitude
of it is equal to 5 meters. So you've learned from the
definition of work, you can't just say, oh, I'm pulling with
10 newtons of force and I'm moving it 5 meters. You can't just multiply the 10
newtons times the 5 meters. You have to find the magnitude
of the component going in the same direction as
my displacement. So what I essentially need to
do is, the length, if you imagine the length of this
vector being 10, that's the total force, but you need to
figure out the length of the vector, that's the component of
the force, going in the same direction as my displacement. And a little simple
trigonometry, you know that this is 10 times the cosine of
60 degrees, or that's equal to, cosine of 60 degrees is 1/2, so
that's just equal to 5. So this magnitude, the
magnitude of the force going in the same direction of
the displacement in this case, is 5 newtons. And then you can
figure out the work. You could say that the work is
equal to 5 newtons times, I'll just write a dot for times. I don't want you to think
it's cross product. Times 5 meters, which is 25
newton meters, or you could even say 25 Joules of
work have been done. And this is all review of
somewhat basic physics. But just think about
what happened, here. What was the work? If I write in the abstract. The work is equal
to the 5 newtons. That was the magnitude of my
force vector, so it's the magnitude of my force vector,
times the cosine of this angle. So you know, let's
call that theta. Let's say it a
little generally. So times the cosine
of the angle. This is the amount of my force
in the direction of the displacement, the cosine of the
angle between them, times the magnitude of the displacement. So times the magnitude
of the displacement. Or if I wanted to rewrite that,
I could just write that as, the magnitude of the displacement
times the magnitude of the force times the
cosine of theta. And I've done multiple videos
of this, in the linear algebra playlist, in the physics
playlist, where I talk about the dot product and the cross
product and all of that, but this is the dot product
of the vectors d and f. So in general, if you're trying
to find the work for a constant displacement, and you have a
constant force, you just take the dot product of
those two vectors. And if the dot product is a
completely foreign concept to you, might want to watch, I
think I've made multiple, 4 or 5 videos on the dot
product, and its intuition, and how it compares. But just to give you a little
bit of that intuition right here, the dot product, when
I take f dot d, or d dot f, what it's giving me is, I'm
multiplying the magnitude, well I could just read this out. But the idea of the dot product
is, take how much of this vector is going in the same
direction as this vector, in this case, this much. And then multiply
the two magnitudes. And that's what we
did right here. So the work is going to be the
force vector, dot, taking the dot part of the force vector
with the displacement vector, and this, of course,
is a scalar value. And we'll work out some
examples in the future where you'll see that that's true. So this is all review of
fairly elementary physics. Now let's take a more
complex example, but it's really the same idea. Let's define a vector field. So let's say that I have a
vector field f, and we're going to think about what
this means in a second. It's a function of x and y, and
it's equal to some scalar function of x and y times the
i-unit vector, or the horizontal unit vector, plus
some other function, scalar function of x and y, times the
vertical unit vector. So what would something
like this be? This is a vector field. This is a vector field
in 2-dimensional space. We're on the x-y plane. Or you could even say, on R2. Either way, I don't want
to get too much into the mathiness of it. But what does this do? Well, if I were to draw my x-y
plane, so that is my, again, having trouble drawing
a straight line. All right, there we go. That's my y-axis, and
that's my x-axis. I'm just drawing the first
quadrant, and but you could go negative in either
direction, if you like. What does this thing do? Well, it's essentially
saying, look. You give me any x, any y, you
give any x, y in the x-y plane, and these are going to end
up with some numbers, right? When you put x, y here, you're
going to get some value, when you put x, y here, you're
going to get some value. So you're going to get some
combination of the i- and j-unit vectors. So you're going to
get some vector. So what this does, it defines a
vector that's associated with every point on x-y plane. So you could say, if I take
this point on the x-y plane, and I would pop it into this,
I'll get something times i plus something times j, and when you
add those 2, maybe I get a vector that something
like that. And you could do that
on every point. I'm just taking random samples. Maybe when I go here,
the vector looks something like that. Maybe when I go here, the
victor looks like this. Maybe when I go here, the
vector looks like that. And maybe when I go up here,
the vector goes like that. I'm just randomly
picking points. It defines a vector on all of
the x, y coordinates where these scalar functions
are properly defined. And that's why it's
called a vector field. It defines what a potential,
maybe, force would be, or some other type of
force, at any point. At any point, if you happen
to have something there. Maybe that's what
the function is. And I could keep doing
this forever, and filling in all the gaps. But I think you get the idea. It associates a vector with
every point on x-y plane. Now, this is called a vector
field, so it probably makes a lot of sense that this could
be used to describe any type of field. It could be a
gravitation field. It could be an electric field,
it could be a magnetic field. And this could be essentially
telling you how much force there would be on some
particle in that field. That's exactly what
this would describe. Now, let's say that in this
field, I have some particle traveling on x-y plane. Let's say it starts there, and
by virtue of all of these crazy forces that are acting on it,
and maybe it's on some tracks or something, so it won't
always move exactly in the direction that the field
is trying to move it at. Let's say it moves in a path
that moves something like this. And let's say that this path,
or this curve, is defined by a position vector function. So let's say that that's
defined by r of t, which is just x of t times i plus y of
t times our unit factor j. That's r of t right there. Well, in order for this to be
a finite path, this is true before t is greater than or
equal to a, and less than or equal to b. This is the path that the
particle just happens to take, due to all of
these wacky forces. So when the particle is right
here, maybe the vector field acting on it, maybe it's
putting a force like that. But since the thing is on some
type of tracks, it moves in this direction. And then when it's here, maybe
the vector field is like that, but it moves in that direction,
because it's on some type of tracks. Now, everything I've done in
this video is to build up to a fundamental question. What was the work done on
the particle by the field? To answer that question, we
could zoom in a little bit. I'm going to zoom in on
only a little small snippet of our path. And let's try to figure out
what the work is done in a very small part of our path, because
it's constantly changing. The field is
changing direction. my object is
changing direction. So let's say when I'm here,
and let's say I move a small amount of my path. So let's say I move, this
is an infinitesimally small dr. Right? I have a differential, it's a
differential vector, infinitely small displacement. and let's say over the course
of that, the vector field is acting in this local
area, let's say it looks something like that. It's providing a force that
looks something like that. So that's the vector field in
that area, or the force directed on that particle right
when it's at that point. Right? It's an infinitesimally small
amount of time in space. You could say, OK, over that
little small point, we have this constant force. What was the work done
over this small period? You could say, what's the
small interval of work? You could say d work, or
a differential of work. Well, by the same exact logic
that we did with the simple problem, it's the magnitude of
the force in the direction of our displacement times the
magnitude of our displacement. And we know what that is, just
from this example up here. That's the dot product. It's the dot product of the
force and our super-small displacement. So that's equal to the dot
product of our force and our super-small displacement. Now, just by doing this, we're
just figuring out the work over, maybe like a really
small, super-small dr. But what we want to do, is we
want to sum them all up. We want to sum up all of the
drs to figure out the total, all of the f dot drs to figure
out the total work done. And that's where the
integral comes in. We will do a line integral
over I mean, you could think of it two ways. You could write just d dot w
there, but we could say, we'll do a line integral along this
curve c, could call that c or along r, whatever you
want to say it, of dw. That'll give us the total work. So let's say, work
is equal to that. Or we could also write it over
the integral, over the same curve of f of f dot dr. And this might seem like a
really, you know, gee, this is really abstract, Sal. How do we actually calculate
something like this? Especially because we have
everything parameterized in terms of t. How do we get this
in terms of t? And if you just think about
it, what is f dot r? Or what is f dot dr? Well, actually, to answer
that, let's remember what dr looked like. If you remember, dr/dt is equal
to x prime of t, I'm writing it like, I could have written dx
dt if I wanted to do, times the i-unit vector, plus y prime of
t, times the j-unit vector. And if we just wanted to dr, we
could multiply both sides, if we're being a little bit more
hand-wavy with the differentials, not
too rigorous. We'll get dr is equal to x
prime of t dt times the unit vector i plus y prime of t
times the differential dt times the unit vector j. So this is our dr right here. And remember what our
vector field was. It was this thing up here. Let me copy and paste it. And we'll see that
the dot product is actually not so crazy. So copy, and let me
paste it down here. So what's this integral
going to look like? This integral right here, that
gives the total work done by the field, on the particle,
as it moves along that path. Just super fundamental to
pretty much any serious physics that you might eventually
find yourself doing. So you could say, well gee. It's going to be the integral,
let's just say from t is equal to a, to t is equal to b. Right? a is where we started
off on the path, t is equal to a to t is equal to b. You can imagine it as being
timed, as a particle moving, as time increases. And then what is f dot dr? Well, if you remember from just
what the dot product is, you can essentially just take the
product of the corresponding components of your of
vector, and add them up. So this is going to be the
integral from t equals a to t equals b, of p of p of x,
really, instead of writing x, y, it's x of t, right? x as a
function of t, y as a function of t. So that's that. Times this thing right here,
times this component, right? We're multiplying
the i-components. So times x prime of t d t, and
then that plus, we're going to do the same thing
with the q function. So this is q plus, I'll
go to another line. Hopefully you realize I could
have just kept writing, but I'm running out of space. Plus q of x of t, y of t, times
the component of our dr. Times the y-component, or
the j-component. y prime of t dt. And we're done! And we're done. This might still seem a little
bit abstract, but we're going to see in the next video,
everything is now in terms of t, so this is just a
straight-up integration, with respect to dt. If we want, we could take the
dt's outside of the equation, and it'll look a little
bit more normal for you. But this is essentially
all that we have to do. And we're going to see some
concrete examples of taking a line integral through a vector
field, or using vector functions, in the next video. 

Transcript for: Using a line integral to find the work done by a vector field example | Khan Academy
Let's apply what we learned in
the last video into a concrete example of the work done by a
vector field on something going through some type of
path through the field. So let's say that I
have a vector field. It's defined over r2
for the x-y plane. So it's a function of x and y. It associates a vector with
every point on the plane. And let's say my vector field
is y times the unit vector i minus x times the
unit vector j. And so you can imagine if
we were to draw let's draw our x- and y-axes. I'll do it over here. If we were to draw our x- and
y-axes, this associates a vector, a force vector
let's say this is actually a force vector with every
point in our x-y plane. So this is x and this is y. So if we're at the point, for
example, 1, 0, what will the vector look like that's
associated with that point? Well, at 1, 0, y is 0, so this
will be 0, i minus 1, j. Minus 1, j looks like this. So minus 1, j will
look like that. At x is equal to 2 I'm just
picking points at random, ones that'll be  y is still 0, and
now the force vector here would be minus 2, j. So it would look
something like this. Minus 2, j. Something like that. Likewise, if we were to go
here, where y is equal to 1 and x is equal to is 0, when y is
equal to 1, we have 1, i minus 0, j, so then our vector
is going to look like that at this point. If we're to go to 2 you
could get the picture. You can keep plotting
these points. You just want to get a sense
of what it looks like. If you go here, the vector's
going to look like that. If you go maybe at this point
right here, the vector's going to look like that. I think you get
the general idea. I could keep filling
in the space for this entire field all over. You know, just to make it
symmetric, if I was here, the vector is going
to look like that. You get the idea. I could just fill in all of
the points if I had to. Now, in that field, I have some
particle moving, and let's say its path is described by
the curve c, and the parameterization of it is x of
t is equal to cosine of t, and y of t is equal to sine of t. And the path will occur from
t let's say, 0 is less than or equal to t is less
than or equal to 2pi. You might already recognize
what this would be. This parameterization
is essentially a counterclockwise circle. So the path that this
guy is going to go is going to start here. Well, you can imagine, t in
this case, you could almost imagine is just the angle of
the circle, but you can also imagine t is time. So at time equals 0, we're
going to be over here. Then at time of pi over 2,
we're going to have traveled a quarter of the circle to there,
so we're moving in that direction. And then at time after pi
seconds, we would have gotten right there. And then all the way after 2pi
seconds, we would have gotten all the way around the circle. So our path, our curve, is one
counterclockwise rotation around the circle, so to speak. So what is the work done by
this field on this curve? So the work done. So the work, we learned in the
previous video, is equal to the line integral over this contour
of our field, of our vector field, dotted with the
differential of our movement, so dotted with the differential
of our movement dr. Well, I haven't even
defined r yet. I mean, I kind of have just the
parameterization here, so we need to have a vector function. We need to have some r
that defines this path. This is just a standard
parameterization, but if I wanted to write it as a vector
function of t, we would write that r of t is equal to x of t,
which is cosine of t times i plus y of t times j, which is
just sine of t times j. And likewise, this is for 0 is
less than or equal to t, which is less than or equal to 2pi. And this are equivalent. The reason why I took the pain
of doing this is so now I can take its vector function
derivative, and can figure out its differential, and then I
can actually take the dot product with this
thing over here. So let's do all of that and
actually calculate this line integral and figure out the
work done by this field. One thing might already
pop in your mind. We're going in a
counterclockwise direction, but at every point where we're
passing through, it looks like the field is going exactly
opposite the direction of our motion. For example, here
we're moving upwards. The field is pulling
us backwards. Here we're moving
to the top left. The field is moving us
to the bottom right. Here we're moving
exactly to the left. The field is pulling
us to the right. So it looks like the field is
always doing the exact opposite of what we're trying to do. It's hindering our
ability to move. So I'll give you a
little intuition. This'll probably deal
with negative work. For example, if I lift
something off the ground, I have to apply force
to fight gravity. I'm doing positive work,
but gravity's doing negative work on that. We're just going to do the math
here just to make you comfortable with this idea, but
it's interesting to think about what's exactly going
on even here. The field is the field I'm
doing in that pink color, so let me stick to that. The field is pushing in that
direction, so it's always going opposite the motion. But let's just do the math to
make everything in the last video a little bit
more concrete. So a good place to start
is the derivative of our position vector function
with respect to t. So we have a dr/dt, which
we could also write as r prime of t. This is equal to the derivative
of x of t with respect to t, which is minus sine of t times
i plus the derivative of y of t with respect to t. Derivative of sine of t
is just cosine of t. Cosine of t times j. And if we want the
differential, we just multiply everything times dt, so we get
to dr is equal to we could write it this way. We could actually even
just put the d well, let me just do it. So it's minus sine of t dt
I'm just multiplying each of these terms by dt, distributive
property times the unit vector i plus cosine of t dt
times the unit vector j. So we have this piece now. And now we want to take the dot
product with this over here, but let me rewrite our
vector field in terms of in terms of t, so to speak. So what's our field going to
be doing at any point t? We don't have to worry
about every point. We don't have to worry, for
example, that over here the vector field is going to be
doing something like that because that's not on our path. That force never had an
impact on the particle. We only care about what
happens along our path. So we can find a function that
we can essentially substitute y and x for, their relative
functions with respect to t, and then we'll have the force
from the field at any point or any time t. So let's do that. So this guy right here, if I
were to write it as a function of t, this is going to be equal
to y of t, right? y is a function of t, so it's sine
of t, right? that's that. Sine of t times i plus or
actually minus x, or x of t. x is a function of t. So minus cosine of t times j. And now all of it seems
a little bit more straightforward. If we want to find this line
integral, this line integral is going to be the same thing as
the integral let me pick a nice, soothing color. Maybe this is a nice one. The integral from t is
equal to 0 to t is equal to 2pi of f dot dr. Now, when you take the dot
product, you just multiply the corresponding components,
and add it up. So we take the product of the
minus sign and the sine of t or the sine of t with the minus
sine of t dt, I get you're going to get minus sine squared
t dt, and then you're going to add that to so you're
going to have that plus. Let me write that
dt a little bit. That was a wacky-looking dt. dt, and then you're going to
have that plus these two guys multiplied by each other. So that's well, there's a
minus to sign here so plus. Let me just change
this to a minus. Minus cosine squared dt. And if we factor out a minus
sign and a dt, what is this going to be equal to? This is going to be equal to
the integral from 0 to 2pi of, we could say, sine squared
plus I want to put the t  sine squared of t plus
cosine squared of t. And actually, let me take the
minus sign out to the front. So if we just factor the
minus sign, and put a minus there, make this a plus. So the minus sign out there,
and then we factor dt out. I did a couple of steps in
there, but I think you got it. Now this is just
algebra at this point. Factoring out a minus sign,
so this becomes positive. And then you have
a dt and a dt. Factor that out,
and you get this. You could multiply this
out and you'd get what we originally have, if that
confuses you at all. And the reason why I did that:
we know what sine squared of anything plus cosine squared
of that same anything is. That falls right out of the
unit circle definition of our trig function,
so this is just 1. So our whole integral has been
reduced to the minus integral from 0 to 2pi of dt. And this is we have
seen this before. We can probably say that this
is of 1, if you want to put something there. Then the antiderivative of 1 is
just so this is just going to be equal to minus and that
minus sign is just the same minus sign that we're
carrying forward. The antiderivative of 1 is just
t, and we're going to evaluate it from 2pi to 0, or from 0 to
2pi, so this is equal to minus that minus sign right
there 2pi minus t at 0, so minus 0. So this is just
equal to minus 2pi. And there you have it. We figured out the work that
this field did on the particle, or whatever, whatever thing
was moving around in this counterclockwise fashion. And our intuition held up. We actually got a negative
number for the work done. And that's because, at all
times, the field was actually going exactly opposite, or was
actually opposing, the movement of, if we think of it
as a particle in its counterclockwise direction. Anyway, hopefully, you
found that helpful. 

Transcript for: Parametrization of a reverse path | Khan Academy
What I want to do in the next
few videos is try to see what happens to a line integral,
either a line integral over a scalar field or a vector field,
but what happens that line integral when we change the
direction of our path? So let's say, when I say change
direction, let's say that I have some curve C that
looks something like this. We draw the x- and y- axis. So that's my y-axis, that is
my x-axis, and let's say my parameterization starts there,
and then as t increases, ends up over there just like that. So it's moving in
that direction. And when I say I reverse
the path, we could define another curve. Let's call it minus C, that
looks something like this. That is my y-axis,
that is my x-axis. And it looks exactly the same,
but it starts up here, and then as t increases, it goes down
to the starting point of the other curve. So it's the exact same shape
of a curve, but it goes in the opposite direction. So what I'm going to do in this
video is just understand how we can construct a
parameterization like this, and hopefully understand
it pretty well. And then next two videos after
this, we'll try to see what this actually does to the line
integral, one for a scalar field, and then one
for a vector field. So let's just say, this
parameterization right here, let's just define it in the
basic way that we've always defined them. Let's say that this is x is
equal to x of t, y is equal to y of t, and let's say this is
from t is equal, or t, let me write this way. t starts at a, so t is
greater than or equal to a, and it goes up to b. So in this example, this was
when t is equal to a, and the point right here is the
coordinate x of a, y of a. And then when t is equal to b
up here, this is really just a review of what we've seen
before, really just a review of parameterization, when t is
equal to b up here, this is the point x of b, y of b. Nothing new there. Now given these functions, how
can we construct another parameterization here that has
the same shape, but that starts here? So I want this to be,
t is equal to a. Let me switch colors. Let me switch to,
maybe, magenta. So I want this to be t is equal
to a, and as t increases, I want this to be t equals b. So I want to move in the
opposite direction. So when t is equal to a,
I want my coordinate to still be x of b, y of b. When t is equal to a, I want a
b in each of these functions, and when t is equal to b, I
want the coordinate to be x of a, y of a. Right? Notice, they're opposites now. Here t is equal to a, x
of a, y of a, here t is equal to b, our endpoint. Now I'm at this coordinate,
x of a, y of a. So how do I construct that? Well, if you think about it,
when t is equal to a, we want both of these functions
to evaluate it at b. So what if we define our x, in
this case, for our minus C curve, what if we say x is
equal to x of, and when I say x of I'm talking about the
same exact function. Actually, maybe I should write
it in that same exact color. x of but instead of putting t
in there, instead of putting a straight-up t in there, what if
I put an a plus b minus t in there? What happens? Well, let me do it
for the y as well. So then our y, y, is equal
to y of a plus b minus t. a plus b minus is t. I'm using slightly different
shades of yellow, might be a little disconcerting. Anyway, what happens
when we define this? When t is equal to a, when t is
equal to a, let's say that this parameterization is also
for t starts at a and then goes up to b. So let's just experiment and
confirm that this parameterization really is the
same thing as this thing, but it goes in an
opposite direction. Or at least, confirm in
our minds intuitively. So when t is equal to a, when t
is equal to a, x will be equal to x of a plus b
minus a, right? This is when t is equal to
a, so minus t, or minus a, which is equal to what? Well, a minus a, cancel out,
that's equal to x of b. Similarly, when t is equal
to a, y will be equal to y of a plus b minus a. The a's cancel out, so
it's equal to y of b. So that worked. When t is equal to a, my
parameterization evaluates to the coordinate x of b, y of b. When t is equal to
a, x of b, y of b. Then we can do the exact same
thing when t is equal to b. I'll do it over here, because
I don't want to lose this. Let me just draw a line here. I'm still dealing with this
parameterization over here. Actually, let me scroll over
to the right, just so that I don't get confused. When t is equal to b, when t
is equal to b, what does x equal? x is equal to x of
a plus b minus b, right? a plus b minus b when
t is equal to b. So that's equal to x of a. and then when she's able to be
why is equal to lie of a plus b minus b, and of course, that's
going to be equal to y of a. So the endpoints work, and if
you think about it intuitively, as t increases, so when t is at
a, this thing is going to be x of b, y of b. We saw that down here. Now as t increases, this
value is going to decrease. We started x of b, y of b, and
as t increases, this value is going to decrease to a, right? It starts from b,
and it goes to a. This one obviously starts
at a, and it goes to b. So hopefully, that should give
you the intuition why this is the exact same curve as that. It just goes in a completely
opposite direction. Now, with that out of the way,
if you accept what I've told you, that these are really
the same parameterizations, just opposite directions. I shouldn't say same
parameterizations. Same curve going in an opposite
direction, or same path going in the opposite direction. In the next video, I'm going to
see what happens when we evaluate this line integral, f
of x ds, versus this line integral. So this is a scalar field, a
line integral of a scalar field, using this curve or this
path, but what happens if we take a line integral over the
same scalar field, but we do it over this reverse path? That's what we're going
to do in the next video. And the video after that, we'll
do it for vector fields. 

Transcript for: Scalar field line integral independent of path direction | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we saw that
if we had some curve in the x-y plane, and we just parameterize
it in a very general sense like this, we could generate another
parameterization that essentially is the same
curve, but goes in the opposite direction. It starts here and it goes
here, as t goes from a to b, as opposed to the first
parameterization, we started with t equals a over here,
and it went up like that. And the question I want to
answer in this video is how a line integral of a scalar field
over this curve, so this is my scalar field, it's a function
of x and y, how a line integral over a scalar field over this
curve relates to, that's a line integral of that same scalar
field over the reverse curve, over the curve going in
the other direction. So the question is, does it
even matter whether we move in this direction or that
direction when we're taking the line integral of
a scalar field? And in the next video, we'll
talk about whether it matters on a vector field. And let's see if we can get
a little intuition to our answer before we even
prove our answer. So let me draw a
little diagram, here. Actually, let me do it a little
bit lower, because I think I'm going to need a little
bit more real estate. So let me draw the y-axis, that
is the x-axis, let me draw the vertical axis, just
like that, that is z. Let me draw a scalar
field, here. So I'll just draw it as some
surface, I'll draw part of it. That is my scalar field, that
is f of xy right there. For any point on the x-y plane
we can associate a height that defines this surface,
this scalar field. And let me put a
curve down there. So let's say that this is the
curve c, just like that. And the way we define it first,
we start over here and we move in that direction. That was our curve c. And we know from several videos
ago that the way to visualize what this line integral means,
is we're essentially trying to figure out the area of a
curtain that has this curve as its base, and its ceiling is
defined by this surface, by the scalar field. So we're literally just trying
to find the area of this curvy piece of paper, or wall, or
whatever you want to view it. That's what this thing is. Now, if we take the same
integral but we take it the reverse curve, instead of
going in that direction, we're now going in the
opposite direction. We're not taking a curve,
we're going from the top to the bottom. But the idea is still the same. You know, I don't know which
one is c, which one is minus c. I could have defined this path
going from that way as c, and then the minus c path would
have started here, and gone back up. So it seems in either case, no
matter what I'm doing, I'm going to try to figure out the
area of this curved piece of paper. So my intuition tells me that
the either these are going to give me the area of this curved
piece of paper, so maybe they should be equal to each other. I haven't proved anything very
rigorously yet, but it seems that they should be equal
to each other, right? In this case, let's say
I'm taking a, let me just make it very clear. I'm taking a ds. a little change in distance,
let me do it in a different color. A little change in distance,
and I'm multiplying it by the height, to find kind of a
differential of the area. And I'm going to add a
bunch of these together to get the whole area. Here I'm doing the same thing. I'm taking a little ds, and
remember, the ds is always going to be positive, the
way we've parameterized it. So here, too, we're taking
a ds, and we're going to multiply it by the height. So once again, we
should take the area. And I want to actually
differentiate that relative to, when you take a normal integral
from a to b of, say, f of x dx, we know that when we switch the
boundaries of the integration, that it makes the
integral negative. That equals the negative
of the integral from b to a of f of x dx. And the reason why this is the
case, is if you imagine this is a, this is b, that
is my f of x. When you do it this way,
your dx's are always going to be positive. When you go in that direction,
your dx's are always going to be positive, right? Each increment, the right
boundary is going to be higher than the left boundary. So your dx's are positive. In this situation, your
dx's are negative. The heights are always going to
be the same, they're always going to be f of x, but here
your change in x is a negative change in x,
when you go from b to a. And that's why you get
a negative integral. In either case here, our path
changes, but our ds's are going to be positive. And the way I've drawn this
surface, it's above the x-y plane, the f of xy is also
going to be positive. So that also kind of gives the
same intuition that this should be the exact same area. But let's prove
it to ourselves. So let's start off with our
first parameterization, just like we did in the last video. We have x is equal to x of t, y
is equal to y of t, and we're dealing with this from,
t goes from a to b. And we know we're going to need
the derivatives of these, so let write that down right now. We can write dx dt is equal to
x prime of t, and dy dt, let me write that a little bit neater,
dy dt is equal to y prime of t. This is nothing groundbreaking
I've done so far. But we know the integral
over c of f of xy. f is a scalar field,
not a vector field. ds is equal to the integral
from t is equal to a, to t is equal to b of f of x of t y of
t times the square root of dx dt squared, which is the same
thing as x prime of t squared, plus dy dt squared, the same
thing as y prime of t squared. All that under the
radical, times dt. This integral is exactly that,
given this parameterization. Now let's do the
minus c version. I'll do that in
this orange color. Actually, let me do the
minus c version down here. The minus the c version, we
have x is equal to, you remember this, actually,
just from up here, this was from the last video. x is equal to x of
a plus b minus t. y is equal to y of
a plus b minus t. And then t goes from a to b, t
goes from a to b, and this is just exactly what we did in
that last video. x is equal to x of a plus b minus t, y is
equal to y of a plus b minus t, same curve, just going in a
different direction as t increases a to b. But let's get the derivative. I'll do it in the
derivative color, maybe. So dx dt. For this path, it's going
to be a little different. We have to do the
chain rule now. Derivative of the inside
with respect to t. Well, these are constants. Derivative of minus t with
respect to t is minus 1. So it's minus 1 times the
derivative of the outside with respect to the inside. Well, that's just x prime
of a plus b minus t. Or, we could rewrite this as,
this is just minus x prime of a plus b minus t. dy dt, same logic. Derivative of the
inside is minus 1 with respect to t, right? Derivative minus t
is just minus 1. Times the derivative
of the outside with respect to the inside. So y prime of a plus b minus
t, same thing as minus y prime a plus b minus t. So given all of that, what is
this integral going to be equal to, the integral of minus c of
the scalar field f of xy ds? What is this going
to be equal to? Well, it's going to be the
integral from, you could almost pattern match it. t is equal
to a to t is equal to be of f of x. But now x is no longer
x of t. x now equals x of a plus b minus t. It's a little bit hairy,
but I don't think anything here is groundbreaking. Hopefully it's not
too confusing. And once again, y is no
longer y of t. y is y of a plus b minus t. And then times a square root,
I'll just switch colors, times the square root
of dx dt squared. What is dx dt squared? dx dt squared is just
this thing squared, or this thing squared. This thing, if I have minus
anything squared, that's the same thing as anything
squared, right? This is equal to minus x prime
of a plus b minus t squared, which is the same thing is
just x prime of a plus b minus t squared, right? You lose that minus information
when you square it. So that's going to be equal to
x prime of a plus b minus t squared, the whole result
function squared, plus dy dt squared. By the same logic, that's going
to be, you lose the negative when you square it. y prime of a plus b
minus t squared. Let me extend the radical. And then all of that dt. So that's the line integral
over the curve c, this is the line integral over
the curve minus c. They don't look equal just yet. This looks a lot more
convoluted than that one does. So let's see if we can
simplify it little bit. And we can simplify it,
perhaps, by making a substitution. Let's let, let me get a nice
substitution color, let's let u equal to a plus b minus t. So first we're going to have to
figure out the boundaries of our integral, well actually,
let's just figure out, what's du? so du dt, the derivative of u
with respect to t is just going to be equal to minus 1, or we
could say that du, if we multiply both sides by the
differential dt, is equal to minus dt. And let's figure out our
boundaries of integration. When t is equal to a,
what is u equal to? u is equal to a plus b minus
a, which is equal to b. And then when t is equal to b,
u is equal to a plus b minus b, which is equal to a. So if we do the substitution on
this crazy, hairy-looking interval, let's simplify a
little bit, and it changes our so this integral is going
to be the same thing as the integral from u, when
t is a, u is b. When t is b, u is a. And f of, x of, this thing
right here is just u. x of u. So it simplified it a good bit. And y of, this thing
right here, is just u. y of u. Times the square root let
me do it in the same color. Times the square root of x
prime of u squared plus y prime of u squared. Instead of a dt, we have to
write a, or could write, if we multiply both sides of this by
minus, we have dt is equal to minus du. So instead of a dt, we have
to put a minus du here. So this is times minus du, or,
just so we don't think this is a subtraction, let's just put
that negative sign out here in the front, just like that. So we're going from b to a of
this thing, right, like that. And just to make the boundaries
of integration make a little bit more sense, because we know
that a is less than b, let's swap them. And I said at the beginning
of this video, for just a standard, regular, run of the
mill integral, if you swap, if you have something going from b
to a of f of x dx, or du, maybe I should write it this way. f of u du. This is equal to the minus
of the integral from a to b of f of u du. And we did that by the logic
that I had graphed up here. That here, when you switch the
order, your du's will become the negatives of each other,
when you actually visualize it, when you're actually finding
the area under the curve. So let's do that. Let's swap the boundaries
of integration right here. And if we do that, that
will negate this negative, or make it a positive. So this is going to be equal
to the integral from a to b. I'm dropping the negative
sign, because I swapped these two things. So I'm going to take the
negative of a negative, which is a positive. Of f of x of u y of u times the
square root of x prime of u squared plus y prime
of u squared du. Now remember, everything we
just did was a substitution. This was all equal to, just to
remember what we're doing, this was the integral of the minus
curve of our scalar field, f of xy ds. Now how does this compare to
when we take the regular curve? How does this compare to that? Let me copy and
paste it to see. You know, I'm using
the wrong tool. Let me copy and paste it
to see how they compare. Copy, then let me pick to
down here, edit, paste. So how do these two
things compare? Let's take a close look. Well, they actually look
pretty similar, right? Over here, for the minus curve,
we have a bunch of u's. Over here, for the positive
curve, we have a bunch of t's, but they're in
the exact same places. These integrals are the
exact same integrals. If you make a u-substitution
here, if you just make the substitution u is equal to t,
this thing is going to be integral from a to b of,
it's going to be the exact same thing. Of f of x of u, y of u times
the square root of of x prime of u squared plus
y prime of u squared du. These two things are identical. So we did all the substitution,
everything, but we got the exact same integrals. So hopefully that satisfies you
that it doesn't matter what direction we go on the curve,
as long as the shape of the curve is the same. Doesn't matter if we go forward
or backward on the curve, we're going to get the same answer. And I think that meets our
intuition, because in either case, we're finding the
area of this curtain. 

Transcript for: Vector field line integrals dependent on path direction | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say I have a position
vector function that looks like this. r of t is equal to x of t
times the unit vector i plus y of t times the unit vector j. And let me actually graph this. So let's say, r of t, I want
to draw it a little bit straighter than that. So that's my y-axis, that is my
x-axis, and let's say r of t, and this is for t is less
than, let me write this. So this is for t is
between a and b. So when t is equal to a, we're
at this vector right here. So if you actually substitute t
is equal to a here, you'd get a position vector that would
point to that point over there. And then, as t increases, it
traces out a curve, or the endpoints of our position
vectors trace a curve that looks something like that. So when t is equal to b, we get
a position vector that points to that point right there. So this defines a path. And the path is going in
this upward direction, just like that. Now let's say that we have
any another position vector function. Let me call it r of t. It's a different one. It's the green r. r of t. Instead of being x of t times
i, it's going to be x of a plus b minus t times i, and instead
of y of t, it's going to be y of a plus b minus t times i. And we've seen this in
the last two videos. This, the path defined by this
position vector function is going look more like this. Let me draw my axes. This is my y-axis,
that is my x-axis. Maybe I should label
them, y and x. This path is going to
look just like this. But instead of starting here
and going there, when t is equal to 1, let me make it
clear, this is also true for a is less than or equal to
t, which is less than b. So t is going to
go from a to b. But here, when t is equal
to a, you substitute it over here, you're going
to get this vector. You're going to start over
there, and as you increment t, as you make it larger and
larger and larger, you're going to trace out that same path,
but in the opposite direction. And so when t is equal to b,
you put that in here, you're actually going to get x of a
and y of a there, right, the b's cancel out, and so you're
going to point right like that. So these are the same, you
could imagine the shape of these paths are the same, but
we're going in the exact opposite direction. So what we're going to do in
this video is to see what happens, how, I guess you could
say, if I have some vector field f of xy equals p
of xy i plus q of xy j. Right? This is just a vector
field over the x-y plane. How the line integral of this
vector field, of this vector field over this path, compares
to the line integral the same vector field over that path. How that compares to this. We'll call this
the minus curve. So this is the positive
curve, we're going to call this the minus curve. So how does it, going over
the positive curve, compare to going over the minus
curve? f of f dot dr. So before I break into the
math, let's just think about a little bit. Let me draw this
vector field f. So maybe it looks, I'm just
going to draw random stuff. So you know, on every point in
the x-y plane, it has a vector, it defines or maps a vector, to
every point on the x-y plane. But we really care about the
points that are on the curve. So maybe on the curve, you
know, this is the vector field at the points on the curve. And let me draw it
over here, too. So all the points on the curve
where we care about, this is our vector field, that
is our vector field. And let's just get an intuition
of what's going to be going. We're summing over the dot,
we're taking each point along the line, and we're summing,
let me start over here. We're taking each point along
the line, let me do it in a different color. And we're summing the dot
product of the value of the vector field at that point, the
dot product of that, with dr, or the differential of our
position vector function. And dr, you can kind of
imagine, as an infinitesimally small vector going in the
direction of our movement. And we take this dot product
here, it's essentially, it's going to be a scalar value,
but the dot product, if you remember, it's the magnitude
of f in the direction of dr, times the magnitude of dr. So it's this, you can imagine
it's the shadow of f onto dr. Let me zoom into that,
because I think it's useful. So this little thing that I'm
drawing right here, let's say that this is my path. This is f at that point. f at that point looks
something like that. And then dr at this point
looks something like that. Let me do it in different
color. dr looks something like that. So that is f. And so the dot product of these
two says, ok, how much of f is going in the same
direction as dr? And you can kind of
imagine, there's a shadow. If you take the f that's going
in the same direction as dr, the magnitude of that times the
magnitude of dr, that is the dot product. In this case, we're going
to get a positive number. Because this length is
positive, this length is positive, that's going to
be a positive number. Now what if our dr was going
in the opposite direction, as it is in this case? So let me draw maybe that
same part of the curve. We have our f, our f will
look something like that. I'm drawing this exact
same part of the curve. But now our dr isn't
going in that direction. Our dr that at this point
is going to be going in the other direction. We're tracing the curve in
the opposite direction. Our dr is now going to be
going in that direction. So if you do f dot dr, you're
taking the shadow, or how much of f is going in the direction
of dr, you take the shadow down here, it's going in the
opposite direction of dr. So you can imagine that when you
multiply the magnitudes, you should get a negative number. Our direction is now opposite,
they're not going in the the shadow of f onto the same
direction is dr is going in the opposite direction as dr.
In this case, it's going in the same direction as dr. So the intuition is that maybe
these two things are the negative of each other. And now we can do some
math and try to see if that is definitely,
definitely the case. So let us first figure out,
let's write an expression for the differential dr. So in this
case, dr, dr dt is going to be equal to x prime of t times i
plus y prime of t times j. In this other example, in the
reverse case, our dr, dr dt, is going to be, what's
it going to be equal to? It's the derivative of
x with respect to t. The derivative of this term
with respect to t, that's the derivative of the inside, which
is minus 1, or minus, times the derivative of the outside
with respect to the inside. So that's going to be,
derivative of the inside is minus 1, times the derivative
of the outside with respect to the inside. x prime of a
plus b minus t times i. And then same thing
for the second term. Derivative of y of this term
with respect to the inside, which is minus 1, times the
derivative of the outside with respect to the inside, which is
y prime of a plus b minus t. So this is going to be the
derivative of the inside, times y prime of a
plus b minus is t j. So this is dr dt in this case,
this is dr dt in that case. And if we wanted to write the
differential dr in the forward curve example, it's going to be
equal to x prime of t times i plus y prime of t times
j times the scalar dt. I could multiply it down into
each of these terms, but it keeps it simple, just
leaving it on the outside. Same logic over here. dr is equal to minus x. I changed my shade of green,
but at least it's still green. a plus b minus t i minus y
prime a plus b minus t j, and I'm multiplying
both sides by dt. Now we're ready to express
this as a function of t. So this curve right here, I'll
do it in pink, the pink one is going to be equal to the
integral from t is equal to a to t is equal to b of f of f of
x of f of x of t y of t dot this thing over here, which is,
I'll just write out here, I could simplify it later. x prime of t i plus
y prime of t j. And then all of that
times the scalar dt. This'll be a scalar value, and
then we'll have another scalar value of dt over there. Now, what is this going
to be equal to if I take this reverse integral? The reverse integral is going
to be the integral from, I'm going to need a little more
space, from a to b, of f of not x of t, but x of a plus b minus
t y of a plus b minus t. I'm writing it small
so I have some space. Dot, this is a vector, so dot
this guy right here, dot dr. Dot minus x prime of a plus b
minus t i, minus y prime of, I'm using up too much space. Let me scroll, go
back a little bit. Actually, let me take it
make it even simpler. Let me take this minus
sign out of it. Let me put a plus, and
then I'll put the minus sign out front. So the minus sign is just a
scalar value, so we could put that minus sign out, you know,
when you take a dot product, and if you multiply a scalar
times a dot product, you could just take the scalar out,
that's all I'm saying. So we take that minus sign
out to this part right here. And then you have x prime of a
plus b minus t i plus y prime of a plus b minus t, scroll
over a little bit, t j dt. So the this is the forward,
this is when we're following it along the forward curve, this
is when we're following it along the reverse curve. Now like we did with the
scalar example, let's make a substitution. I want to make it very
clear what I did. All I did here, is I just
took the dot product, but this negative sign,
I just took it out. I just said, this is the same
thing as negative 1 times this thing, or negative 1 times this
thing is the same thing as that. So let's make a substitution on
this side, because I really just want to show you that this
is the negative of that, right there, because that's what
our intuition was going for. So let me just focus
on that side. So let me make a substitution. u is equal to a plus b minus t. Then we get du is equal
to minus dt, right? Just take the derivative
of both sides. Or you get dt is
equal to minus du. And then you get, when t
is equal to a, u is equal to a plus b minus a. So then, u is equal to b. And then when t is equal to
b, u is equal to a, right? Which is equal to b, a
plus b minus b is a. u is equal to a. So this thing, using that
substitution simplifies to, and this is the whole point, that
simplifies to minus integral from u is, when t is a, u is b. From b, when t is b, u is a. The integral from u is equal
to b to u is equal to a of f of x of u y of u, right? That is u, that is u. Dot x prime of u times i,
that's u right there, plus y prime of u times j. And then, instead of a
dt, I need to put a du. dt is equal to minus du. So I could write minus du
here, or just to not make it confusing, I'll put the du
here, and take the minus out front. I already have a minus out
there, so they cancel out. They will cancel out,
just like that. And so you might say, hey Sal,
these two things look pretty similar to each other. They don't like they're
negative of each other. And I'd say, well, you're
almost right, except this guy's limits of integration are
reversed from this guy. So this thing right here, if
we reverse the limits of integration, we have to
then make it negative. So this is equal to minus the
integral from a to b of the vector f of x of u y of u dot
x prime of u i plus y prime of u j du. And now this is identical. This integral, this definite
integral, is identical to that definite integral. We just have a
different variable. We're doing dt here, we have du
here, but we're going to get the same exact number for any a
or b, and given this vector f and the position
vector path r of t. So just to summarize everything
up, when you're dealing with line integrals over vector
fields, the direction matters. If you go in the reverse
direction, you're going to get the negative version of that. And that's because at any point
we take the dot product, you're not going in the, necessarily,
you're going in the opposite direction, so it'll be the
negative of each other. But when you're dealing with
the scalar field, we saw on the last video, we saw that it
doesn't matter which direction that you traverse the path in. That the positive path
has the same value as the negative path. And that's just because we're
just trying to find the area of that curtain. Hopefully you found
that mildly amusing. 

Transcript for: Path independence for line integrals | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
What I want to do in this video
is establish a reasonably powerful condition in which we
can establish that at vector field, or that a line integral
of a vector field is path independent. And when I say that, I mean
that let's say I were to take this line integral along the
path c of f dot d r, and let's say my path looks like this. That's my x and y axis, and
let's say my path looks something like this: I start
there and I go over there to point c. My end point, the
curve here is c. And so I would evaluate this
line integral, this victor field along this path. This would be a path
independent vector field, or we call that a conservative vector
field, if this thing is equal to the same integral over a
different path that has the same end point. So let's call this c1, so
this is c1, and this is c2. This vector field is
conservative if I start at the same point but I
take a different path. Let's say I go something like
that: if I take a different path and this is my c2 I
still get the same value. What this is telling me is that
all it cares about to evaluate these integrals is my starting
point and my ending point. It doesn't care what
I do in between. It doesn't care how I get
from my starting point to my end point. These two integrals have the
same start point and same end point, so irregardless of
their actual path, they're going to be the same. That's what it means for f to
be a conservative field, or what it means for this integral
to be path independent. So before I prove or I show you
the conditions, let's build up our tool kit a little bit. And so you may or may not
have already seen the multivariable chain rule. And I'm not going to prove
it in this video, but I think it'll be pretty
intuitive for you. So maybe it doesn't need to
have a proof, or I'll prove it eventually, but I really just
want to give you the intuition. And all that says is that if I
have some function let's say I have f of x and y, but x and
y are then functions of, let's say a third variable, t, so f
of x of t and y of t that the derivative of f with respect
to t is multivariable. I have two variables
here in x and y. This is going to be equal
to the partial of f with respect to x. How fast does f change as x
changes times the derivative of x with respect to t This is a
single variable function right here, so you to take a
regular derivative. So times how fast x changes
with respect to t. This is a standard derivative,
this is a partial derivative, because at that level we're
dealing with two variables. And we're not done. plus how
fast f changes with respect to y times the derivative
y with respected t. So d y d t. And I'm not going to prove
it, but I think it makes pretty good intuition. This is saying, as I move
a little bit d t, how much of a d f do I get? Or how fast this f change
with respect to t? It says, well there's two ways
that f can change: it can change with respect to x and it
can change with respect to y. So why don't I add those two
things together as they're both changing with respect to t? That's all it's saying, and if
you kind of imagined that you could cancel out this partial x
with this d x, and this partial y with this d y, you could kind
of imagine the partial of f with respect to t on the x side
of things, and then plus the partial of f with respect
to t in the y dimension. And then that'll give you
the total change of f with respected to t. Kind of a hand-wavy argument
there, but at least to me this is a pretty intuitive formula. So that's our tool kit right
there; the multivariable chain rule. We're going to put that
aside for a second. Now let's say I have some
vector field f and it's different than this f, so I'll
do it in a different color; magenta I have some
vector field f that is a function of x and y. And let's say that it happens
to be the gradient of some scalar field. I'll call that capital F. And this is gradient which
means that capital F is also function of x and y so I
don't want to write it on a new line, I could also write up
here; capital F is also a function of x and y and the
gradient, and all that means is that the vector field f of xy
lower-case f of xy, is equal to the partial derivative of
upper-case F with respect to x times the i-unit vector plus
the partial of upper-case F with respect to y times
the j-unit vector. This is the definition of
the gradient right here. And if you imagine that
upper-case F is some type of surface so this is uppercase
F of xy the gradient F of xy is going to be a vector field
that tells you the direction of steepest ascent at any point. So it'll be defined
the xy plane. So on the xy plane it'll tell
you so let me draw; that's the vertical axis, maybe that's
the x axis, that's the y axis so the gradient of it, if you
take any point on the xy plane, it'll tell you the direction
you need to travel to go into the deepest ascent. And for this gradient
field it's going to be something like this. And maybe over here it starts
going in that direction because you would descend towards
this little minimum point right here. Anyway, I don't want
to get too involved. And the whole point of this
isn't to really get the intuition behind gradients;
there are other videos on this. The point of this is to get
other a test to see whether something is path independent;
whether a vector field is path independent, whether
it's conservative. And it turns out that if this
exists and I'm going to prove it now if f is the gradient
of some scalar field, then f is conservative. Or you could say it doesn't
matter what path we follow when we take a line integral over f,
it just matters about our starting point and
our ending point. Now let me see if I can
prove that to you. So let's start with the
assumption that f can be written this way, as the
gradient, that lower-case f can be written as the gradient
of some upper-case F. So in that case our integral
well, let's define our path first. So our position vector
function we always need one of those to do a line integral
or a vector line integral r of t is going to be equal to x
of t times i plus y of t times j 4t going between a and b. You've seen this multiple
times; this is a definition of pretty much any path
in two dimensions. And then we're going to say f
of xy is going to be equal to this: it's going to be the
partial derivative of uppercase F with respect to x so we're
assuming that this exists, that this is true times i plus
the partial of upper-case F with respect to y times j. Now, given this what is
lower-case f dot dr going to equal over this
path right here? This path is defined by this
position function right there. Well, it's going to be equal
to, we need to figure out what dr is, and we've done
that in multiple videos. I'll do that on the
right over here. dr, we've seen it
multiple times. Actually, I'll solve
it out again. dr over dt by definition was
equal to dx over dt times i plus I don't know why it
got all fat like that dy over dt times j. That's what dr over dt is. So if we want to figure out
what dr is, the differential of dr, if we want to play with
differentials in this way, multiply both sides times dt. And actually I'm going to
treat dt, I'll multiply it; I'll distribute it. It's dx over dt times dti
plus dy over dt times dtj. So if we're taking the dot
product of f with dr, what are we going to get? So this is going to be the
integral over the curve from I'll write the c right there;
we could write in terms of the end points as t once we feel
good that we have everything in terms of t but it's going to
be equal to this dot that, which is equal to I'll try to
stay color consistent the partial of upper-case F with
respect to x times that, times dx over d t I'm going to
write this st in a different color times dt plus the
partial of upper-case F with respect to y times
we're multiplying the j components, right? When you take the dot product,
multiply the i components, and then add that to what you get
from the product of the j components so this j
component's partial of upper-case F with respect to y,
and then we have times switch to a yellow dy over dt times
that dt right over there. And then we can
factor out the dt. Or actually, so I don't have to
even write it again, right now I wrote it without, well
let me write it again. So this is equal
to the integral. And let's say we have it in
terms of t; we've written everything in terms of t, so t
goes from a to b, and so this is going to be equal to I'll
write it in blue the partial of upper case F with respect to
x times dx over dt plus I'm distributing this dt out plus
the partial of uppercase F with respect to y. dy over dt. all of that times dt. This is equivalent to that. Now you might realize
why I talked about the multivariable chain rule. What is this right here? What is that right there? You can do some
pattern matching. That is the same thing as the
derivative of upper-case F with respect to t. Look at this; let me let me
copy and paste that just so you appreciate it. So this is our definition, or
this is our I won't say definition; one can
actually prove it. You don't have to start from
there -but this is our multivariable chain
rule right here. The driven of any function with
respect t is the partial of that function with respect to x
times dx over dt plus the partial of that function
with respect to dy over dt. I have the partial of
upper-case F with respect to x times dx over dt plus the
partial upper-case F with respect to y. This and this are identical
if you just replace this lower-case f with
an upper-case F. So this in blue right here,
this whole expression is equal to the integral from t is equal
to a to t is equal to b of in blue here the derivative
of f with respect to dt. And how do you evaluate
let me just the dt in green how do you evaluate
something like this? I just want to make a point:
this is just this from the multivariable chain rule. And how do you evaluate a
definite integral like this? Well, you take the
antiderivative of the inside with respect to dt. So what is this going
to be equal to? You take the antiderivative of
the inside, that's just f. So this is equal to f of t. And let me be clear. We wrote before that
f is a function. So our upper-case F is a
function of x and y, which could also be written, since
each of these are functions of t, could be written as
f of x of t of y of t. I'm just rewriting it
in different ways. And this could be just
written as f or t. These are all equivalent,
depending on whether you want to include the x's or the
y's only, or the t's only, or them both. Because both of the x's and
y's are functions of t. So this is the derivative
of f with respect to t. If this was just in terms of
t, this is the derivative of that with respect to t. We take its antiderivative,
we're left just with f, and we have to evaluate it from t is
equal to a to t is equal to b. And so this is equal to and
this is the home stretch this is equal to f
of b minus f of a. And if you want to think about
it in these terms, this is the same thing. This is equal to f of x of b
over y of b let me make sure I got all the parentheses
minus f of x of a over y of a. These are equivalent. You give me any point on the
xy plane, an x and a y, and it tells me where I am. This is my capital F,
it gives me a height. Just like that. This associates a value with
every point on the xy plane. But this whole exercise,
remember this is the same thing as that. This is our whole thing that we
were trying to prove: that is equal to f dot dr. f dot dr,
our vector field, which is the gradient of the capital F
remember F was equal to the gradient of F, we assume that
it's the gradient of some function capital F, if that is
the case, then we just did a little bit of calculus or
algebra, whatever you want to call it, and we found that we
can evaluate this integral by evaluating capital F at t is
equal to b, and then subtracting from that capital
F at t is equal to a. But what that tells you is that
this integral, the value of this integral, is only
dependent at our starting point, t is equal to a, this is
the point x of a, y of a, and the ending point, t is equal to
b, which is x of b, y of b. That integral is only dependent
on these two values. How do I know that? Because to solve it because
I'm saying that this thing exists I just had to evaluate
that thing at those two points; I didn't care about
the curve in between. So this shows that if F is
equal to the gradient this is often called a potential
function of capital F, although they're usually the negative
each other, but it's the same idea if the vector field f is
the gradient of some scale or field upper-case F, then we can
say that f is conservative or that the line integral of f
dot dr is path independent. It doesn't matter what path we
go on as long as our starting and ending point are the same. Hopefully found that useful. And we'll some
examples with that. And actually in the next video
I'll prove another interesting outcome based on this one. 

Transcript for: Closed curve line integrals of conservative vector fields | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we saw that
if a vector field can be written as the gradient of a
scalar field or another way we could say it: this would be
equal to the partial of our big f with respect to x times i
plus the partial of big f, our scalar field with respect to y
times j; and I'm just writing it in multiple ways just so you
remember what the gradient is but we saw that if our vector
field is the gradient of a scalar field then we
call it conservative. So that tells us that f is a
conservative vector field. And it also tells us, and this
was the big take away from the last video, that the line
integral of f between two points let me draw two points
here; so let me draw my coordinates just so we know
we're on the xy plane. My axes: x-axis, y-axis. Let's say I have the point, I
have that point and that point, and I have two different paths
between those two points. So I have path 1, that goes
something like that, so I'll call that c1 and it
goes in that direction. And then I have, maybe in
a different shades of green, c2 goes like that. They both start here
and go to there. We learned in the last video
that the line integral is path independent
between any two points. So in this case the line
integral along c1 of f dot dr is going to be equal to the
line integral of c2, over the path c2, of f dot dr. The line,
if we have a potential in a region, and we may be
everywhere, then the line integral between any two points
is independent of the path. That's the neat thing about
a conservative field. Now what I want to do in this
video is do a little bit of an extension of the take
away of the last video. It's actually a pretty
important extension; it might already be obvious to you. I've already written this
here; I could rearrange this equation a little bit. So let me do it. So let me a rearrange this. I'll just rewrite
this in orange. So the line integral on path c1
dot dr minus I'll just go subtract this from both sides
minus the line integral c2 of f dot dr is going
to be equal to 0. All I did is I took this take
away from the last video and I subtracted this
from both sides. Now we learned several videos
ago that if we're dealing with a line integral of a vector
field not a scalar field with a vector field,
the direction of the path is important. We learned that the line
integral over, say, c2 of f dot dr, is equal to the negative of
the line integral of minus c2 of f dot dr where we denoted
minus c2 is the same path as c2, but just in the
opposite direction. So for example, minus c2 I
would write like this so let me do it in a different color
so let's say this is minus c2, it'd be a path just like
c2 I'm going to call this minus c2 but instead of going
in that direction, I'm now going to go in that direction. So ignore the old c2 arrows. We're now starting from
there and coming back here. So this is minus c2. Or we could write, we could
put, the minus on the other side and we could say that
the negative of the c2 line integral along the path of c2
of f dot dr is equal to the line integral over the reverse
path of f dot dr. All I did is I switched the negative on
the other side; multiplied both sides by negative 1. So let's replace in this
equation we have the minus of the c2 path; we have that right
there, and we have that right there so we could just
replace this with this right there. So let me do that. So I'll write this
first part first. So the integral along the curve
c1 of f dot dr, instead of minus the line integral along
c2, I'm going to say plus the integral along minus c2. This let me switch to the
green this we've established is the same thing as this. The negative of this curve, or
the line integral along this path, is the same thing as the
line integral, the positive of the line integral along
the reverse path. So we'll say plus the line
integral of minus c2 of f dot dr is equal to 0. Now there's something
interesting. Let's look at what the
combination of the path of c1 and minus c2 is. c1 starts over here. Let me get a nice,
vibrant color. c1 starts over here
at this point. It moves from this point
along this curve c1 and ends up at this point. And then we do the minus c2. Minus c2 starts at this point
and just goes and comes back to the original point;
it completes a loop. So this is a closed
line integral. So if you combine this,
we could rewrite this. Remember, this is just a loop. By reversing this, instead of
having two guys starting here and going there, I now can
start here, go all the way there, and then come all
the way back on this reverse path of c2. So this is equivalent to
a closed line integral. So that is the same thing as an
integral along a closed path. I mean, we could call the
closed path, maybe, c1 plus minus c2, if we wanted to be
particular about the closed path. But this could be, I drew c1
and c2 or minus c2 arbitrarily; this could be any closed path
where our vector field f has a potential, or where it is the
gradient of a scalar field, or where it is conservative. And so this can be written as
a closed path of c1 plus the reverse of c2 of f dot dr.
That's just a rewriting of that, and so that's
going to be equal to 0. And this is our take
away for this video. This is, you can view
it as a corollary. It's kind of a low-hanging
conclusion that you can make after this conclusion. So now we know that if we have
a vector field that's the gradient of a scalar field in
some region, or maybe over the entire xy plane and this is
called the potential of f; this is a potential function. Oftentimes it will be the
negative of it, but it's easy to mess with negatives but if
we have a vector field that is the gradient of a scalar field,
we call that vector field conservative. That tells us that at any point
in the region where this is valid, the line integral from
one point to another is independent of the path; that's
what we got from the last video. And because of that, a closed
loop line integral, or a closed line integral, so if we take
some other place, if we take any other closed line integral
or we take the line integral of the vector field on any closed
loop, it will become 0 because it is path independent. So that's the neat take away
here, that if you know that this is conservative, if you
ever see something like this: if you see this f dot dr and
someone asks you to evaluate this given that f is
conservative, or given that f is the gradient of another
function, or given that f is path independent, you can now
immediately say, that is going to be equal to 0, which
simplifies the math a good bit. 

Transcript for: Example of closed line integral of conservative field | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's see if we can apply some
of our new tools to solve some line integrals. So let's say we have a line
integral along a closed curve  I'm going to define the path
in a second  of x squared plus y squared times
dx plus 2xy times dy. And then our curve c is
going to be defined by the parameterization. x is equal to cosine of t,
and y is equal to sine of t. And this is valid for
t between 0 and 2 pi. So this is essentially a
circle, a unit circle, in the xy plane, and we
know how to solve these. Let's see if we can use some of
our discoveries in the last couple of videos to maybe
simplify this process. So the first thing you might
say, hey, this looks like a line integral, but you have a
dx and dy, I don't see a dot dr here. It's not clear to me that
this is some type of even a vector line integral. I don't see any of vectors. What I want to do first, and
the reason why I wanted to show you this example, is just to
show you that this is just another form of writing really
a vector line integral. To show you that you just have
to realize if I have some are r of t  this is our curve. I don't even write these
functions in there. I'm just going to write
it's x of t times i plus y of t times j. We've seen several videos now
that we can write dr dt as being equal to dx dt times
i plus dy dt times j. We've seen this multiple times. And we've seen multiple times
we want to get the differential dr, we can just multiply
everything times dt. And normally I just put a
dt here and a dt there and get rid of this dt. But if you multiply everything
times dt, if you view the differentials as actual
numbers, you can multiply and normally you can treat
them like that. Then you just get rid
of all of the dt's. So dr you could imagine is
equal to dx times the unit vector i plus dy times
the unit vector j. So put that aside, and
you might already see a pattern here. So if we define our vector
field f, f of xy, as being equal to x squared plus y
squared, i plus 2xy j, what is this thing? What is this thing over here? Well, what is f dot
dr going to be? Dot products, you just multiply
the corresponding components of our vectors and
then add them up. So it's going to be if you take
this f and dot it with that dr you're going to get the i
component, x squared plus y squared times that dx plus 
I'll do it in the pink again  plus the y component, the j
component 2xy times that dy. That's the dot product. And notice, this thing
right here is identical to that thing right there. So our line integral, just to
put it in a form that we're familiar with, this is the same
exact thing as the line integral over this curve c,
this closed curve c, of this f  maybe I'll write it in that
magenta color, or actually it's more of a purple or pink
color  f dot this dr. That's what this line integral
is, it's just a different way of writing it. Now that you see it, in the
future if you see in kind of this differential form, you'll
immediately know OK, there's one vector field that this is
its x component, this is its y component, dotting with the dr.
This is the x component of dr or the i component, and this is
the y component or the j component of the dr. So you
immediately know what the vector field is that we're
taking a line integral of. This is the x, that's the y. Now, let's ask
ourselves a question. Is f conservative? So is f equal to the gradient
of some scalar field, we'll call it capital F 
is this the case? So let's assume it is and see
if we can solve for a scalar field whose grade
it really is f. Then we know that f
is conservative. And then if f is conservative,
and this is the whole reason we want to do it, that means that
any closed loop, any line integral over a closed curve of
f is going to be equal to 0 and we'd be done. So if we can show this then the
answer to this question or this question is going to be 0. We don't even have to mess with
the cosine of t's and the sign of t's and all that. Actually, we don't even have
to take antiderivatives. So let's see if we can find
an f whose gradient is equal to that right there. So in order for f's gradient to
be that, that means that the partial derivative of our
capital F with respect to x has got to be equal to
that right there. It's got to be equal to x
squared plus y squared. And it also tells us that the
partial derivative of capital F with respect to y has
got to be equal to 2xy. And just as a review, if I have
the gradient of any function, of any scalar field is equal to
the partial of f with respect to x times i plus the
partial of capital F with respect to y times j. So that's why I'm just
pattern matching. I'm just saying well, gee, if
this is the gradient of that, then this must be that, which I
wrote down right here, and this must be that, which
I wrote down here. So let's see if I can find
an f that satisfies both of these constraints. So we could just take the
antiderivative with respect to x on both sides  remember,
you just treat y like a constant or y squared like a
constant  it's just a number. So then we could say that f is
equal to the antiderivative of x squared is x to
the third over 3. And then the antiderivative
of y squared  remember, this is with respect to x. So you just treat
it like a number. That could just be the
number k, or this could be the number 5. So this is just going
to be that times x. So plus x times y squared. And then there could be
some function of y here. So plus some, I don't know,
I'll call it g of y. Because there could have been
some function of y here. If it's a pure function of y,
when you take the derivative or the partial with respect to x,
this would have disappeared. So it would reappear when we
take the antiderivative. And just to be clear, let me
make it clear that f is going to be a function of x and y. So we just have the, I
guess you could say the antiderivative
with respect to x. Let's see if we take the
antiderivative with respect to y and then we can
reconcile the two. So based on this, f of xy, f of
xy is going to have to look like  so let's take the
antiderivative with respect to y here. So remember, you just treat x
like it's just some number  it could be a k, it could
be an m, it could be a 5. It's just some number. So if x is just some
 the antiderivative of 2y is y squared. And if x is just a number
there, the antiderivative of this with respect to y is
just going to be xy squared. Don't believe me? Take the partial of this
with respect to y. Treat x like a constant
you'll get 2 times xy with no exponent there. And, of course, if you took the
antiderivative with respect to x, there might be some
function of x here. We were just basing it
off of that information. Now given that, this
information says f of xy is going to have to look
something like this. This information tells us f
of xy's going to have to look something like that. Let's see if there is an
f of xy that looks like both of them essentially. So let's see. On this one we have xy
squared here, we have an xy squared there. So good. That looks good. And it over here we have an f
of x  we have something that's a pure function of x. And here we have something
that is a pure function of x. So these two things could
be the same thing. Then here we have a pure
function of y that might be there, but it didn't really
show up anywhere over here. So we could just say hey,
that's going to be 0. 0 is a pure function of y. You could have something
called g of y is equal to 0. And then we get that capital F
of xy is equal to x to the third over 3 plus xy squared. And the gradient of this is
going to be equal to f. And we've already
established that. But just to hit the point home,
let's take the gradient of it. Just if you don't believe this
little stuff that I did right there, let's take the gradient. The gradient of f is equal to,
and sometimes people put a little vector there
because you're getting a vector out of it. You could put a little vector
on top of that gradient sign. The gradient of f is
going to be what? The partial of this with
respect to x times i. So the partial of this
with respect to x. The derivative here is
3 divided by 3 is 1. So it's just x squared plus the
derivative of this with respect to x is y squared times i plus
the partial with respect to y. Well, the partial with respect
to y of this 0, partial with respect to y of this is
2xy or 2xy to the first. So it's 2xy times j. And this is exactly equal to f,
our f that we wrote up there. So we've established that f can
definitely be written  f is definitely the gradient of some
potential scalar function there. So f is conservative, and that
tells us that this closed loop integral, line integral, of f
is going to be equal to 0. And we are done. We could even ignore the actual
parameterization of the path. 

Transcript for: Second example of line integral of conservative vector field | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's do another problem. Very similar to the last one,
but with a subtle difference. And that subtle difference
will make a big difference. Let's say we take the line
integral over some curve c I'll define the curve in a
second of x squared plus y squared dx plus 2xy dy and
this might look very familiar. This was very similar to what
we saw last time, except last time we had a closed
line integral. This is not a closed
line integral. And our curve, c, the
parameterization is x is equal to cosine of t, y
is equal to sine of t. So far it looks like sit. Let me write sine of t so
far, it looks very similar to the closed line integral
example we did in the last video, but instead of t going
from 0 to 2 pi, we're going to have t go from 0 to pi. t is greater than or equal to
0, is less than or equal to pi. So now we're essentially, our
path if I were to draw it on the x-y plane so that is my
y-axis, that is my x-axis. So now our path isn't all the
way around the unit circle. Our path our curve c now
just starts at t is equal to 0. You can imagine t is
almost the angle. t is equal to 0, and we're
going to go all the way to pi. So that's what our path is
right now, in this example. So it's not a curved path. It's not a closed path. So we can't just show that f,
in this example and we're going to re-look at what f
looks like hey, if that's a conservative vector field, if
it's a closed loop that equals 0, this isn't a closed loop. So we can't apply that. But let's see if we can apply
some of our other tools. So like we saw in the last
video, this might look a little bit foreign to you. But if you say that f is equal
to that times i, plus that times j, then it might look
a little bit more familiar. If we say that f of xy the
vector field f is equal to x squared plus y squared times i
plus 2xy times j and dr I don't even have to look at this
right now. dr, you can always write it as dx times
i plus dy times j. You'll immediately see, if you
take the dot product of these 2 things, if you take f dot dr
they're both vector valued, vector valued differential,
vector valued field, or vector valued function if you take f
dot dr, you'll get this right here. You'll get what we have
inside of the interval. You'll get that
right there, right? That times that you take
the product of the i terms that times that is equal to
that, and add it to the product of the j terms. 2xy times dy. Write like that. So our integral, we can
rewrite it as this. Along this curve of f dot
dr, where this is our f. Now, we still might want
to ask ourselves, is this a conservative field? Or does it have a potential? Is f equal to the gradient of
some function, capital F? I guess I could write the
gradient like that, because it creates a vector. This is a vector, too. Is this true? And we saw in the
last video, it is. I'll redo it a little
bit fast this time. Because if this is true, we
can't say this is a closed loop and say, oh, it's just
going to be equal to 0. But if this is true, then we
know that this that the integral is path independent. And we'll know that this is
going to be equal to capital F, if we say that t is going
from well, in this case t is going from 0 to pi we could
say that this is going to be equal to capital F of pi
minus capital F of 0. Or if we want to write it in
terms of x and y because f is going to be a function of x and
y we could write and this right here, these are t's. We could also write that this
is equal to f of x of pi, y of pi, minus f of x of 0, y of 0. That's what I mean
when I say f of pi. If we were to write f
purely as a function of t. But we know that this capital
F is going to be a function. It's a scalar function
defined on xy. So we could say f of
x of pi, y of pi. These are the t's now. These are all
equivalent things. So if it is path dependent,
we can find our f. We can just evaluate this
thing by just taking our f, evaluating it at
these two points. At this point, and at
that point right there. Because it would be
path independent. If this is a conservative, if
this has a potential function, if this is the gradient of
another scalar field, then this is a conservative vector field,
and its line integral is path independent. It's only dependent on that
point and that point. So let's see if we
can find our f. So I'm going to do exactly what
we did in the last video. If you watch that last
video, it might be a little bit monotonous. But I'll do it a little
bit faster here. So we know that the partial of
f with respect to x is going to have to be equal to
this right here. So that's x squared
plus y squared. Which tells us, if we take the
antiderivative, with respect to x, then f of xy is going to
have to be equal to x to the third over 3 plus xy squared
right? y squared is just a constant in terms of
x plus f of y. There might be some function
of y that, when you take the partial with respect
to x, it just disappears. And then we know that the
partial of f with respect to y has got to be equal to
that thing or that thing. We're saying that this
is the gradient of f. So this has to be the
partial with respect to y. 2xy. And you might want to
watch the other video. I go through this just a little
bit slower in that one. So the antiderivative of this
with respect to y so we get f of xy would be equal to xy
squared plus some function of x. Now we did this in
the last video. These 2 things have to be the
same thing, in order for the gradient of capital F
to be lowercase f. And we have xy
squared, xy squared. We have a function of x, we
have a function purely of x. And then we don't have a
function purely of y here, so this thing right
here must be 0. So we've solved. Our capital F of xy must
be equal to x to the 3 over 3 plus xy squared. So we know that lowercase f
is definitely conservative. It is path independent. It has its potential. It is the gradient of
this thing right here. And so to solve our integral
this was a 0 to solve our integral, we just have to
figure out x of pi, y of pi, x of 0, y of 0. Evaluate the bullet points,
and then subtract the 2. So let's do that. So x was cosine of
t, y is sine of t. Let me rewrite it down here. So x is equal to cosine of t. y is equal to sine of t. So x of 0 is equal to cosine
of 0, which is equal to 1. x of pi is equal to cosine of
pi, which is equal to minus 1. y of 0 is sine of
0, which is 0. y of pi, which is equal to sine
of pi, which is equal to 0. So f of x of pi, y of pi
this is the same thing, so let me rewrite this. Our integral is simplified to
our integral along that path of f dot dr is going to be equal
to capital F of x of pi. x of pi is minus 1. y of pi is equal to 0. Minus capital F of x of 0
is 1, comma y of 0 is 0. And so what is this equal to? Just remember, this right
here is the same thing is that right there. That is x of pi. That is y of pi. That term right there. You can imagine this whole f of
minus 1, 0 that's the same thing as f of pi, if you
think in terms of just t. That could be a little
confusing, so I want to make that clear. So this is just
straightforward to evaluate. What is f of minus 1, 0? x is minus 1. y is 0. So it's going to be minus 1
to the third power right, that's our x over 3. So it's minus 1/3. It's going to be minus 1/3
plus minus 1 times 0 squared. So that's just going to be a 0. In both cases, the y is 0. So this term is
going to disappear. So we can ignore that. And then we have minus
f of 1, comma 0. We put a 1 here. 1 to the third over 3. That is 1/3 plus 1
times 0 squared. That's just 0. So this is going to be
equal to minus 1/3. Minus 1/3 is equal
to minus 2/3. And we're done. And once again, because this is
a conservative vector field, and it's path independent, we
really didn't have to mess with the cosine of t's and sines of
t's when we actually took our antiderivative. We just have to find the
potential function and evaluate it at the 2 end points to get
the answer of our integral, of our line integral, minus 2/3. 

Transcript for: Green's theorem proof part 1 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say we have a
path in the xy plane. That's my y-axis, that is
my x-axis, in my path will look like this. Let's say it looks like that;
trying to draw a bit of an arbitrary path, and let's say
we go in a counter clockwise direction like that
along our path. And we could call this path
so we're going in a counter clockwise direction we
could call that path c. And let's say we also
have a vector field. And our vector field is going
to be a little unusual; I'll call it p. p of xy. It only has an i component, or
all of its vectors are only multiples of the i-unit vector. So it's capital P of xy
times the unit vector i. There is no j component, so if
you have to visualize this vector field, all of the
vectors, they're all multiples of the i-unit vector. Or they could be negative
multiples, so they could also go in that direction. But they don't go diagonal
or they don't go up. They all go left to
right or right to left. That's what this vector
field would look like. Now what I'm interested in
doing is figuring out the line integral over a closed loop
the closed loop c, or the closed path c of p dot dr,
which is just our standard kind of way of solving
for a line integral. And we've seen what
dr is in the past. dr is equal to dx times i plus
dy times the j-unit vector. And you might say, isn't
it dx, dt times dt? Let me write that: can't dr
be written as dx, dt times dti plus dy, dt times dtj? And it could, but if you
imagine these differentials could cancel out, and you're
just left with the dx and a dy, and we've seen
that multiple times. And I'm going to leave it in
this form because hopefully, if we're careful, we won't have to
deal with the third parameter, t. So let's just look at it in
this form right here with just the dx's and the dy's. So this integral can be
rewritten as the line integral, the curve c actually let
me do it over down here. The line integral over the path
of the curve c of p dot dr. So we take the product of each of
the coefficients, let's say the coefficient of the i component,
so we get p I'll do that in green, actually do that purple
color so we get p of xy times dx plus well there's no 0
times j times dy; 0 times dy id just going to be 0 so this
our line integral simplified to this right here. This is equal to this original
integral up here, so we're literally just taking the line
integral around this path. Now I said that we play our
cards right, we're not going to have to deal with the third
variable, t; that we might be able just solve this integral
only in terms of x. And so let's see if
we can do that. So let's look at our minimum
and maximum x points. That looks like our
minimum x point. Let's call that a. Let's call that our maximum
x point; let's call that b. What we could do is we can
break up this curve into two functions of x.
y is functions of x. So this bottom one right here
we could call as y1 of x. This is just a standard curve;
you know when we were just dealing with standard calculus,
this is just you can imagine this is f of x and
it's a function of x. And this is y2 of x. Just like that. So you can imagine two paths;
one path defined by y1 of x let me do that in a different
color; magenta one path defined by y1 of x as we go
from x is equal to a to x is equal to b, and then another
path defined by y2 of x as we go from x is equal to
b to x is equal to a. That is our curve. So what we could do is, we
could rewrite this integral which is the same thing as that
integral as this is equal to the integral we'll first do
this first path of x going from a to b of p of x. And I could to say p of x and
y, but we know along this path y is a function of x. So we say x and y1 of x. Wherever we see a y we
substitute it with a y1 of x, dx. So that covers that first path;
I'll do it in the same color. We could imagine this is c1. This is kind of the first half
of our curve well it's not exactly the half but that
takes us right from that point to that point. And then we want to
complete the circle. Maybe I'll do that, and
I'll do that in yellow. That's going to be equal to
sorry we're going to have to add these two plus the
integral from x is equal to b to x is equal to a of do it
in that same color of p of x. And now y is going
to be y2 of x. Wherever you see a y, you
can substitute with y2 of x along this curve. y2 of x, dx. This is already getting
interesting and you might already see where
I'm going with this. So this is the curve c2. too I think you appreciate if
you take the union of c1 and c2, we've got our whole curve. So let's see if we can simplify
this integral a little bit. Well one thing we want to
do, we might want to make their end points the same. So if you swap a and b
here, it just turns the integral negative. So you make this into a b, that
into an a, and then make that plus sign into a minus sign. And now we can rewrite this
whole thing as being equal to the integral from a to b of
this thing, of p of x and y1 of x minus this thing, minus p of
x and y2 of x, and then all of that times dx. I'll write it in a third color. Now, I'm going to do something
a little bit arbitrary, but I think you'll appreciate why I
did this by the end of this video, and it's just a
very simple operation. What I'm going to do is I'm
going to swap these two. So I'm essentially going to
multiply this whole thing by negative 1, or essentially
multiply and divide by negative 1. So I can multiply this by
negative 1 and then multiply the outside by negative 1, and
I will not have changed the integral; I'm multiplying
by negative 1 twice. So if I swap these two things,
if I multiply the inside times negative 1, so this is going to
be equal to do the outside of the integral, a to b. If I multiply the inside
I'll do a dx out here if I multiply the inside of the
integral by negative 1, these two guys switch. So it becomes p
of x of y2 of x. And then you're going to have
minus p of x and y1 of x. My handwriting's getting
a little messy. But I can't just multiply
just the inside by minus 1. I don't want to change the
integral, so I multiplied the inside by minus 1, let me
multiply the outside by minus 1. And since I multiplied by
minus 1 twice, these two things are equivalent. Or you could say this is
the negative of that. Either way, I think you
appreciate that I haven't changed the integral
at all, numerically. I multiplied the inside and
the outside by minus 1. And now the next step I'm going
to do, it might look a little bit foreign to you, but I
think you'll appreciate it. It might be obvious to you
if you've recently done some double integrals. So this thing can be rewritten
as minus the integral from a to b of and let me do a new
color of the function p of x, y evaluated at y2 of x minus
and let me make it very clear; this is y is equal to y2 of x
minus this function evaluated at y is equal to y1 of x. And of course all
of that times dx. This statement and what we
saw right here this statement right here are
completely identical. And then if we assume that a
partial derivative of capital P with respect to y exists,
hopefully you'll realize and I'll focus on this a little
bit because I don't want to confuse you on this step. Let me write the outside
of this integral. So this is going to be equal
to and this is kind of a neat outcome, and we're starting
to build up to a very neat outcome, which will probably
have to take the next video to do so we do the outside dx. If we assume that capital P has
a partial derivative, this right here is the
exact same thing. This right here is the exact
same thing as the partial derivative of P with respect to
y, dy, the antiderivative of that from y1 of x to y2 of x. I want to make you feel
comfortable that these two things are equivalent. And to realize they're
equivalent, you'll probably just have to start here
and then go to that. We're used to seeing this;
we're used to seeing a double integral like this, and then
the very first step we say, OK to solve this double integral
we start on the inside integral right there, and we say, OK
let's take the antiderivative of this with respect to y. So if you take the
antiderivative of the partial of p with respect to y, you're
going to end up with p. And since this is a definite
integral, the boundaries are going to be in terms of x,
you're going to evaluate that from y is equal to y2 of x, and
you're going to subtract from that y is equal to y1 of x. Normally we start with
something like this, and we go to something like this. This is kind of unusual that we
started, we kind of solved, we started with the solution of
the definite integral, and then we slowly built back to
the definite integral. So hopefully you realize that
this is true, that this is just we're kind of going
in a reverse direction than we normally do. And if you do realize that,
then we've just established a pretty neat outcome. Because what is
this right here? Let me go back, let me see
if I can fit everything. I have some function and I'm
assuming that the partial of P with respect to y exists
but I have some function defined over the xy plane. You know, you could
imagine we're dealing in three dimensions now. We'll draw a little bit neater. So that's y, that's x, that's
z, so this, you could imagine, is some surface; it just
happens to be the partial of P with respect to x. So it's some surface on
the xy plane like that. And what are we doing? We're taking the double
integral under that surface, around this region. The region's boundaries in
terms of y are defined by y2 and y1 of x. So you literally
have that curve. That's y2 on top,
y1 on the bottom. And so we're essentially
taking the volume above. So if you imagine with the base
is the whole floor of this is going to be the area inside of
this curve, and then the height is going to be the function
partial of P with respect to y. It's going to be a little hard
for me to draw, but this is essentially some type of a
volume, if you want to visualize it that way. But the really neat outcome
here is if you call this region r, we've just simplified
this line integral. And this was a special one. It only had an x-component, the
vector field, but we've just simplified this line integral
to being equivalent to maybe I should write this line
integral because that's what's the really neat outcome. We've just established that
this thing right here, which is the same as our original
one, so let me write that. The closed line integral around
the curve c of p of xy, dx, we've just established that
that's the same thing as the double integral over the region
r this is the region r of the partial of
P with respect to y. And we could write dy, dx, or
we could write da, whatever you want to write, but this is
the double integral over that region. The neat thing here is using a
vector field that only had an x-component, we were able to
connect its line integral to the double integral over
region oh, and I forgot something very important. We had a negative
sign out here. So this was a minus
sign out here. Or we could even put the minus
in here, but I think you get the general idea. In the next video, I'm going to
do the same exact thing with the vector field that only has
vectors in the y-direction. And then we'll connect
the two and we'll end up with Green's theorem. 

Transcript for: Green's theorem proof (part 2) | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say we have the same path
that we had in the last video. Draw my y-axis,
that is my x-axis. Let's say the path looks
like this, it looks something like this. It's the same one we
had in the last video. Might not look exactly like
it, let me see what I did in the last video. It looked like that in the
last video, but close enough. Let's say we're dealing
with the exact same curve as the last video. We could call that curve c. Now last video, we dealt with
a vector field that only had vectors in the i direction. Let's build with another vector
field that only has vectors in j direction, or the
vertical direction. So let's say that q, the vector
field q of xy, say it's equal to capital Q of xy times j, and
we are going to concern ourselves we're going to
concern ourselves with though closed line integral around the
path c of q dot dr. And we've seen it already. dr can be rewritten as dx
times i, plus dy times j. So if we were to take the dot
product of these two, this line integral is going to
be the exact same thing. This is going to be the same
thing as the closed line integral over c of q dot dr.
Well, Q only has a j-component. So if you take [? its ?] 0i, so 0 times dxs is 0,
and then you're going to have Q xy times dy. They had no i-component, so
this is just going to be Q, I'll switch to that same color
again, Q of x and y times dy. That's the dot product. There was no i-component,
that's why we lose the dx. Now let's see if there's any
way that we can solve this line integral without having to
resort to a third parameter, t. Just like we did in
the last video. Actually, it will be almost
identical, we're just dealing with y's now instead of x's. So what we can do is, we
could say, well, what's our minimum y and our maximum y? So our minimum y, let's
say it's right here. The minimum y,
let's call that a. Let's say our maximum y that we
attain is right over there. Let's call that b. Oh, and just like in the last,
I forgot to tell you the direction of the curve. But this is the same path as
last time, so we're going in a counterclockwise direction. The exact same curve,
exact same path. So we're going in
that direction. Now in the last video, we broke
it up into two functions of x's, two y's as a
function of x. Now we want to deal with y's. Let's break it up into
two functions of y. So if we break this path into
two paths, those are kind of our extreme points, let's call
this past right here, let's call that path right there,
let's call that y, let's call that x of so here, along this
path, x is equal to or I could just write path
2, or a call it c2. We could say it's, x is equal to x2 of y. That's that path. And then the first path, or
it doesn't have to be the first path, depending
where you start. You can start anywhere. Let's say this one in magenta. We'll call that path 1, and we
could say, that that's defined as x is equal to x1 of y. It's a little confusing when
you have x as a function of y, but it's really completely
analogous to what we did in the last video. We're literally just
swapping x's and y. We're now expressing x as
a function of y, instead of y as a function of x. So we have these two curves. You can imagine just flipping
it, and we're doing the exact same thing that we did in
the last videos, just now in terms of y. But if you look at it this way,
this line integral can be rewritten as being equal to
the integral, let's just do c2 first. This is the integral
from b to a. We start at b, and we go to a. This is, we're coming back
from a high y to a low y. The integral from b to a of
Q of in that gray color. Q of, instead of having an x
there, we know along this curve right here, x is equal to, we
want everything in terms of y. So here, x is equal to x2 of y. So Q of x2 of y, x2 of y comma
y, maybe I'm using too many colors here, but I think
you get the idea. dy. So this is the part of the
line integral, just over this left hand curve. And then we're going to add to
that the line integral, or really just a regular integral
now, from y is equal to a to y is equal to b of Q of, instead
of x being equal to x2, now x is equal to x1 of y, it's equal
to this curve, this other function. So x1 of y, x1 of y comma y,
dy, and we can do exactly what we did in the previous video. Instead of, we don't like the
larger number on the bottom, so let's swap these two around. So if you swap these two, if
you make this into an a, and this into a b, that makes it
the negative of the integral, when you swap the two,
change the direction. This is exactly what we did in
the last video, so hopefully it's nothing too fancy. But now that we have the same
boundaries of integration, these two definite integrals,
we can just write them as one definite integral. So this is going to be equal
to the integral from a to b. And I'll write this one
first, since it's positive. Of, I'll write in this one. Q of x1 of y comma
y, minus this one. Right? We have the minus sign here. Minus q of x2 of y and y dy. Let me do that in
that neutral color. dy, that's multiplied by
all of these things. I distributed out the dy,
I think you get the idea. This is identical to what
we did in the last video. And this could be rewritten as,
this is equal to the integral from a to b of, and inside of
the integral, we're evaluating the function of Q of xy from
the boundaries, the upper boundary, where, the upper
boundary is going to be from x is equal to x1 of y, and
the lower boundary is x is equal to x2 of y. Right? All the x's we substituted with
that, and then we get some expression, and then from that,
we subtract this with x substituted as x2 of y. That's exactly what we did, and
just like I said in last video, we're going kind of the reverse
direction that we normally go in definite integrals. We normally get to this,
and then the next step is, we get this. But now we're going in the
reverse direction, but it's all the same difference. And all of that times dy. And just like we saw in the
last video, this, let me do it in orange, this expression
right here, actually let me draw that dy a little
further out so it doesn't get all congested. Let me do the dy out here. This expression, this entire
expression, is the same exact thing as the integral from x is
equal to, I can just write it here, let me write it
in the same colors. x2 of y to x1 of y to x1
of y the partial of Q with respect to x dx. I want to make it very clear. This is, at least in my
mind, the first part, a little confusing. But if you just saw an integral
like this, this is the inside of a double integral. And it is. The outside is what we
saw there, the integral from a to b, dy. But if you just saw this in a
double integral, what you would do is you would take the
antiderivative of this, the antiderivative of this
with respect to x, the antiderivative of the partial
of Q with respect to x with respect to x, is going
to be just Q of xy. And since it's a definite
integral, you would evaluate it at x1 of y, and then subtract
from that, this function evaluated x2 of y, which
is exactly what we did. So hopefully you
appreciate that. And then we got our result,
which is very similar to the last result. What does this double
integral represent? It represents, well, anything,
if you have any double integral that goes from if you
imagine, this is some function, let me draw it in
three dimensions. This is really almost a
review of what we did in the last video. If that's the y-axis, that's
our x-axis, that's our z-axis. This is some function of x
and y, so some surface you can imagine on xy plane. It's some surface. So we could call that the
partial of q with respect to x. And what this double integral
is, this is essentially defining a region, and you can
kind of view this dx times dy as kind of a small
differential of area. So the region under question,
the boundary points, are from y going from, y goes from, at the
bottom, it goes from x2 of y, which we saw was a curve that
looks something like this. That's the lower y, and over
here, if we draw it in two dimensions, this was
the lower y-curve. The upper y-curve is x1 of y,
so the upper y-curve looks something like that. The upper y-curve goes
something like that. So x varies from the lower
y-curve to the upper y-curve, right? That's what we're
doing right here. And then y varies from a to b. And so this is essentially
saying, let's take the double integral over this region
right here of this function. So it's essentially the volume,
if this is the ceiling, and this boundary is
essentially the wall. It's the volume of that room. And I don't know what it
would look like when it comes up here. But you can kind of imagine
something like that. It would be the volume of that. So that's what we're taking. This is the identical result
we got in the last video. And this is a
pretty neat thing. So all of a sudden, this
vector, that and Q of xy, I didn't draw it out like I did
the last time, Q of xy only has [? things ?] in the j-direction, so it only
has, if I were to draw its vector field, the vectors
only go up and down. They have no horizontal
component to them. But we saw, when you start with
a vector field like this, you take the line integral around
this closed loop, and I'll rewrite it right here, you take
this line integral around this closed loop of q dot dr, which
is equal to the integral around the closed loop of Q of xy dy. We just figured out that that's
equivalent to the double integral over the region. This is the region. Right? That's exactly what
we're doing over here. If I just gave you the region,
you'd have to define it, you'd say, well, x is going from,
this is going from this function to that function, and
y is going from a to b, and you might want to review the double
integral videos, if that confuses you. So we're taking the double
integral over the region of the partial of Q with respect to x,
d well, you could write dx dy, or you can even right
a little da, right? The differential of area,
right, that we can imagine as a da, which is the
same thing as a dx dy. And if we combine that with the
last video, and this is kind of the neat bringing it all
together part, the result of the last video was this. That if I had a function that's
defined completely in terms of x, we had this, right here. We had that result. Actually, let me copy and paste
both of these to a nice clean part of my whiteboard,
and then we can do the exciting conclusion. Let me copy and paste that. So that's what we got
in the last video. And this video, we
got this result. I'll just copy and paste
that part right there. You might already predict
where this is going. And then let me
paste it over here. This is the result
from this video. Now let's think about an
arbitrary vector field but is defined as, I'll do that in
pink, let's say F is a vector field defined over the xy
plane, and F is equal to P of xy i plus Q of xy j. You can almost imagine F being
the addition of our vector fields, P and Q, that we did
in the last two videos. Q was this video, and we did
P in the video before that. But this is really any
arbitrary vector field. And let's say we want to take
the vector field, or sorry, the line integral of this vector
field, along some path. It could be the same one
we've done, which has been a very arbitrary one. It's really any arbitrary path. So let me draw some
arbitrary path over here. Let's say, that is my arbitrary
path, my arbitrary curve. Let's say it goes in that
counterclockwise direction, just like that. And I'm interested in what the
line integral, the closed line integral, around that
path of F dot dr is. And we've seen it
multiple times. dr is equal to dx i
plus dy times j. So this line integral can be
rewritten as, this is equal to the line integral
around the path c. F dot dr, that's going to be
this term times dx, so that's p of xy times dx plus this
term, Q of xy times dy. And this whole thing,
essentially this is the same thing as the line integral of
p of xy dx, plus the line integral of Q of xy dy. Now what are these things? This is what we figured out in
the first video, this is what we figured out just
now in this video. This thing right here is
the exact same thing as that over there. So this is going to be equal to
the double integral over this region right here, of the minus
partial of P with respect to y. Instead of a dy dx, we
could say just over the differential of area. And then plus this
one, this result. Q. This thing right here is
exactly what we just proved, is exactly what we just
showed in this video. So that's plus, I'll leave it
up there, maybe I'll do it in the yellow, plus the double
integral over the same region of the partial of Q
with respect to x. da, where that's just dy
dx, or dx dy, you can switch the order, it's the differential of area. And now, we can add
these two integrals. What do we get? So this is equal to, and
this is kind of our big, grand conclusion. Maybe magenta is
called for here. The double integral over the
region of, I'll write this one first because it's positive,
that one's negative, of the partial of Q with respect to x,
minus the partial of p with respect to y, d, the
differential of area. This is our big takeaway. This is our big takeaway. Let me write it here. The line integral of the closed
loop of F dot dr is equal to the double integral
of this expression. And it's something,
just remember. We're taking the function that
was associated with the x-component, or the
i-component, we're taking the partial with respect to y. And the function that was
associated with the y-component, we're taking the
partial with respect to x. And that first one, we're
taking the negative of. That's a good way
to remember it. But this result right here,
this is, maybe I should write it in green, this
is Green's Theorem. And it's a neat way to relate a
line integral of a vector field that has these partial
derivatives, assuming it has these partial derivatives, to
the region, to a double integral of the region. Now, and this is a little bit
of a side note, we've seen in several videos before, we've
learned that if F is conservative, which means it's
the gradient of some function, that it's path-independent,
that the closed integral around any path is equal to 0. And that's still true. So that tells us that if F is
conservative, this thing right here must be equal to 0. That's the only way that you're
always going to enforce that this whole integral is going to
be equal, is going to be equal to 0 over any, any, any region. I'm sure you could think
of situations where they cancel each other out, but
really over any region. That's the only way that
this is going to be true. That these two things are
going to be equal to 0. So then you could say, partial
of Q with respect to x, minus the partial of P with respect
to y, has to be equal to 0, or these two things have
to equal each other. Or. This is kind of a corollary
to Green's Theorem. Kind of a low-hanging fruit
you could have figured out. The partial of Q with respect
to x is equal to the partial of P with respect to y. And when you study exact
equations in differential equations, you'll
see this a lot more. And actually, well, I won't go
into too much, but conservative fields, you're actually, the
differential form of what you see in the line integrals, if
it's conservative, it would be an exact equation. But we're not going to
go into that too much. But hopefully you might see the
parallels if you've already run into exact equations in
differential equations. But this is the big takeaway,
and let's maybe do some examples using this takeaway
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Green's theorem example 1 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's see if we can use our
knowledge of Green's theorem to solve some actual
line integrals. And actually, before I show an
example, I want to make one clarification on
Green's theorem. All of the examples that I did
is I had a region like this, and the inside of the region
was to the left of what we traversed. So all my examples I went
counterclockwise and so our region was to the left of if
you imagined walking along the path in that direction, it
was always to our left. And that's the situation which
Green's theorem would apply. So if you were to take a line
integral along this path, a closed line integral, maybe we
could even specify it like that. You'll see that in some
textbooks along the curve c of f dot dr. This is what
equals the double integral over this region r of the partial of
q with respect to x minus the partial of p with
respect to y d area. And just as reminder, now this
q and p are coming from the components of f in
the situation. f would be written as f of xy
is equal to P of xy time the i component plus Q of xy
times the j component. So this is a situation where
the inside of the region is to the left of the direction
that we're taking the path. If it was in the reverse,
then we would put a minus sign right here. If this arrow went the other
way, we'd put a minus sign and we can do that because we know
that when we're taking line integrals through vector
fields, if we were reverse the direction it becomes
the negative of that. We showed that, I think,
4 or 5 videos ago. With that said, it was
convenient to write Green's theorem up here. Let's actually solve a problem. Let's say I have the line
integral and let's say we're over a curve. I'll define the
curve in a second. But let's say that the integral
we're trying to solve is x squared minus y squared
dx plus 2xy dy. And then our curve they're
giving us the boundary. The boundary is the region. I'll do it in a
different color. So the curve is boundary of the
region given by all of the points x,y such that x is a
greater than or equal to 0, less than or equal to 1. And then y is greater than
or equal to 2x squared and less than or equal to 2x. So let's draw this region that
we're dealing with right now. So let me draw my x-axis
or my y-axis, sorry. My y-axis and then my
x-axis right there. And let's see. x goes from
0 to 1, so if we make that's obviously 0. Let's say that that is x
is equal to 1, so that's all the x values. And y varies, it's above
2x squared and below 2x. Normally, if you get to large
enough numbers, 2x squared is larger, but if you're below 1
this is actually going to be smaller than that. So the upper boundary is
2x, so there's 1 comma 2. This is a line y is equal to
2x, so that is the line y is let me draw a straighter
line than that. The line y is equal to 2x
looks something like that. That right there is
y is equal to 2x. Maybe I'll do that in yellow. And then the bottom curve right
here is y is going to be greater than 2x squared. It might look
something like this. And of course, the region that
they're talking about is this, but we're saying that the curve
is the boundary of this region and we're going to go in I
counterclockwise direction. I have to specify that. So our curve, we could start at
any point really, but we're going to go like that. Then get to that point and then
come back down along that top curve just like that. And so this met the condition
that the inside of the region is always going to be our left,
so we can just do the straight up Green's theorem, we don't
have to do the negative of it. And let's define our region. Let's just do our region. This integral right here is
going to go I'll just do it the way y varies from y is
equal to 2x squared to 2y is equal to 2x. And so maybe we'll integrate
with respect to y first. And then x, I'll
do the outside. The boundary of x
goes from 0 to 1. So they set us up well to
do an indefinite integral. Now we just have to figure
out what goes over here Green's theorem. Our f would look like
this in this situation. f is f of xy is going to be
equal to x squared minus y squared i plus 2xy j. We've seen this in
multiple videos. You take the dot product of
this with dr, you're going to get this thing right here. So this expression right
here is our P of x y. And this expression right
here is our Q of xy. So inside of here we're just
going to apply Green's theorem straight up. So the partial of Q with
respect to x so take the derivative of this
with respect to x. We're just going to
end up with the 2y. And then from that we're going
to subtract the partial of P with respect to y. So if you take the derivative
of this with respect to y that becomes 0 and then, here you
have the derivative with respect to y here is minus 2y. Just like that. And so this simplifies
to 2y minus minus 2y. That's 2y plus plus 2y. I'm just subtracting
a negative. Or this inside, and just
to save space, this inside that's just 4y. I don't want to have to
rewrite the boundaries. That right there is
the same thing as 4y. The partial of Q with respect
to y, 2y minus the partial of P with respect to y. Which is minus 2y. You subtract a negative
you get a positive. You have 4y. Let's take the antiderivative
of the inside with respect to y and we're going
to get 2y squared. Let me do it a
little bit lower. We're going to get 2y squared
if you take the partial with respect to y you're
going to get 4y. We're going to evaluate that
from y is equal to 2x squared to y is equal to 2x. And then of course, we
still have the outside integral still there. x goes from 0 to 1 dx. This thing is going to be equal
to the integral from 0 to 1 and then we evaluate
it first at 2x. So you put a 2x in here,
2x squared is 4x squared. 2 squared, x squared, so
4x squared times 2 is going to be 8x squared. Minus put this guy in there. 2x squared squared is
2x to the fourth. 4x to the fourth times
2 is 8x to the fourth. Did I do that right? 2x squared going to
put it there for y, substitute y with it. That squared is 4
X to the fourth. Times 2 is 8x x to the fourth. Very good. All right. Now dx. Now this is just a
straightforward one-dimensional integral. This is going to be equal
to I'll just do it here. This is going to be equal to
the antiderivative of 8x squared is 8/3 x to the third. And then the antiderivative
of 8x to the fourth is minus 8/5 x to the fifth. Then we're going to have to
evaluate that from 0 to 1, or we can put a little line there. When you put 1 in there
you get I'll do it in a different color. We get 8/5 times 1 to
the third, which is 8/5 minus 8/5 minus 8/5. And then we're going to have
minus when you put 0 in here you're just going
to get a bunch of 0's. Oh sorry, I made a mistake. It would have been a blunder. It's 8/3. 8/3 times 1 to the third minus
8/5 times 1 to the fifth, so that's minus 8/5. And then, when you subtract the
0, you evaluate 0 here. you're just going to get a bunch of
0's so you don't have to do anything else. So now we just have to
subtract these two fractions. So let's get a common
denominator of 15. 8/3 is the same thing if
we multiply the numerator and denominator by 5. That is 40/15. And then if we multiply this
numerator and denominator by 3, that's going to be 24/15. So minus 24/15 and we get
it being equal to 16/15. And so using Green's theorem we
were able to find the answer to this integral up here. It's equal to 16/15. Hopefully you found
that useful. I'll do one more example
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Green's theorem example 2 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say I have a path in the
xy plane that's essentially the unit circle. So this is my y-axis, this is
my x-axis, and our path is going to be the unit circle. And we're going to traverse
it just like that. We're going to traverse
it clockwise. I think you get the idea. And so its equation
is the units circle. So the equation of this is x
squared plus y squared is equal to 1; has a radius
of 1 unit circle. And what we're concerned
with is the line integral over this curve c. It's a closed curve c. It's actually going in that
direction of 2y dx minus 3x dy. So, we are probably
tempted to use Green's theorem and why not? So let's try. So this is our path. So Green's theorem tells us
that the integral of some curve f dot dr over some path where f
is equal to let me write it a little nit neater. Where f of x,y is equal to P
of x, y i plus Q of x, y j. That this integral is equal to
the double integral over the region this would be the
region under question in this example. Over the region of the partial
of Q with respect to x minus the partial of
P with respect to y. All of that dA, the
differential of area. And of course, the region
is what I just showed you. Now, you may or may not
remember well, there's a slight, subtle thing in
this, which would give you the wrong answer. In the last video we said that
Green's theorem applies when we're going counterclockwise. Notice, even on this little
thing on the integral I made it go counterclockwise. In our example, the
curve goes clockwise. The region is to our right. Green's theorem this applies
when the region is to our left. So in this situation when the
region is to our right and we're going so this
is counterclockwise. So in our example, where we're
going clockwise, the region is to our right, Green's theorem
is going to be the negative of this. So in our example, we're going
to have the integral of c and we're going to go in the
clockwise direction. So maybe I'll draw it like that
of f dot dr. This is going to be equal to the double
integral over the region. You could just swap these two
the partial of P with respect to y minus the partial of
Q with respect to x da. So let's do that. So this is going to be equal
to, in this example, the integral over the region
let's just keep it abstract for now. We could start setting the
boundaries, but let's just keep the region abstract. And what is the partial of P
with respect let's remember, this right here is our I
think we could recognize right now that if we take f dot dr
we're going to get this. The dr contributes
those components. The f contributes
these two components. So this is P of x,y. And then this is Q of x,y. And we've seen it. I don't want to go into the
whole dot dr and take the dot product over and over again. I think you can see that
this is the dot product of two vectors. This is the x component
of f, y component of f. This is the x component of dr,
y component of dr. So let's take the partial of P
with respect to y. You take the derivative of this
with respect to y, you get 2. Derivative of 2y is just 2. So you get 2, and then,
minus the derivative of Q with respect to x. Derivative of this with
respect to x is minus 3. So we're going to get minus
3, and then all of that da. And this is equal to the
integral over the region. What's this, it's
2 minus minus 3? That's the same
thing as 2 plus 3. So it's the integral over
the region of 5 dA. 5 is just a constant, so we can
take it out of the integral. So this is going to turn out
to be quite a simple problem. So this is going to be equal to
5 times the double integral over the region R dA. Now what is this thing? What is this thing right here? It looks very abstract,
but we can solve this. This is just the
area of the region. That's what that double
integral represents. You just sum up all
the little dA's. That's a dA, that's a dA. You sum up the infinite
sums of those little dA's over the region. Well, what's the area
of this unit circle? Here we just break out a little
bit of ninth grade actually, even earlier than that
pre-algebra or middle school geometry. Area is equal to pi r squared. What's our radius? So unit circle,
our radius is 1. Length is 1. So the area here is pi. So this thing over here,
that whole thing is just equal to pi. So the answer to our line
integral is just 5 pi, which is pretty straightforward. I mean, we could have taken the
trouble of setting up a double integral where we take the
antiderivative with respect to y first and write y is equal to
the negative square root of 1 minus x squared y is equal to
the positive square root. x goes from minus 1 to 1. But that would have been
super hairy and a huge pain. And we just have to realize,
no, this is just the area. And the other interesting thing
is I challenge you to solve the same integral without
using Green's theorem. You know, after generating a
parameterization for this curve, going in that direction,
taking the derivatives of x of t and y of t. Multiplying by the appropriate
thing and then taking the antiderivative way hairier
than what we just did using Green's theorem to get 5 pi. And remember, the reason why
it wasn't minus 5 pi here is because we're going in
a clockwise direction. If we were going in a
counterclockwise direction we could have applied the straight
up Green's theorem, and we would have gotten minus 5 pi. Anyway, hopefully you
found that useful. 

Transcript for: Introduction to parametrizing a surface with two parameters | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
All the parameterizations
we've done so far have been parameterizing a curve
using one parameter. What we're going to start doing
this video is parameterizing a surface in three dimensions,
using two parameters. And we'll start with an
example of a torus. A torus, or more commonly
known, as a doughnut shape. And we know what a
doughnut looks like. Let me draw it in a suitable,
well, I don't have any suitable doughnut colors,
so I'll just use green. A doughnut looks
something like this. It has a hole in the center,
And maybe the other side of the doughnut looks something
like that, and we could shade it in like that. That is what a
doughnut looks like. So how do we construct that
using two parameters? So what we want to do, is you
can just visualize it, a doughnut, if you were to
draw some axes here. So that's our doughut. Let me draw some axes. So let's say I have the z-axis
that goes straight up and down. So we have drawn it here, the
doughnut's a little at a tilt, so the z-axis, I'll
tilt it a little bit. So our z-axis goes straight
through the center of the doughnut. So that right there, this is
going to be an exercise in drawing more than
anything else. So that is my z-axis, and then
you can imagine the z-axis goes from there, and then this
coming out of here will be my x-axis. That right there is my x-axis,
and then maybe my y-axis comes out like that. And the whole reason why I drew
it this way, is that if you imagine the cross section of
this doughnut, I'll draw a little bit neater, but the
cross section of this doughnut in the x-z axis, is going to
look something like this. If I were to slice it in the
x-z axis, it would look something like that. That would be the slice. It would trace out, and
we're thinking about not a full doughnut, just the
surface of a doughnut. So it would trace out
a circle like this. If you were to cut the doughnut
in the positive z-y axis, it's going to trace out a circle
that looks something like that, right there. And if you go out here, you're
going to get bunch of circles. So if you think about it, it's
a bunch of circles rotated around the z-axis. If you think of it that way,
it'll give us some good intuition for the best way
to parameterize this thing. So let's do it that way. Let's start off with
just the z-y axis. I'll draw it a little bit
neater than I've done here. So that is the z-axis, and
that is y, just like that. And let's say that the center
of these circles, let's say it lies on, you know, it can lie,
when you cross the z-y axis, the center sits on the y-axis. I didn't draw it that
neatly here, but I think you can visualize. So it sits right
there on the y-axis. And let's say that it is a
distance b away from the center of the torus, or from the
z-axis it's a distance of b. It's always going to
be a distance of b. It's always, if you imagine the
top of the doughnut, let me draw the top of the doughnut. If you're looking down on a
doughnut, let me draw a doughnut right here, if you're
looking down on a doughnut, it just looks something like that. The z-axis is just going to
be popping straight out. The x-axis would come down like
this, and then the y-axis would go to the right, like that. So you can imagine, I'm
just flying above this. I'm sitting on the z-axis
looking down at the doughnut. It will look just like this. And if you imagine the cross
section, this circle right here, the top part of the
circle if you're looking down, would look just like that. And this distance b is a
distance from the z-axis to the center of each
of these circles. So this distance, let me draw
it in the same color, from the center to the center of these
circles, that is going to be b. It's just going to keep
going to the center of the circles, b. That's going to be b,
that's going to be b. That's going to be b. From the center of our torus
to the center of our circle that defines the torus,
it's a distance of b. So this distance right here,
that distance right there is b. And from b, we can imagine
we have a radius. A radius of length a. So these circles have
radius of length a. So this distance right here is
a, this distance right here is a, this distance right there
is a, that distance right there is a. If I were look at these
circles, these circles have radius a. And what we're going to do
is have two parameters. One is the angle that this
radius makes with the x-z plane, so you can imagine
the x-axis coming out. Let me do that in
the same color. You can imagine the
x-axis coming out here. So this is the x-z plane. So one parameter is going to
be the angle between our radius and the x-z plane. We're going to call that angle,
or that parameter, we're going to call that s. And so as s goes between 0 and
2 pi, as s goes between 0 in 2 pi, when the 0 is just going to
be at this point right here, and then as it goes to 2 pi,
you're going to trace out a circle that looks
just like that. Now, we only have
one parameter. What we want to do is then
spin this circle around. What I just drew is that
circle right there. What we want to do is spin
the entire circle around. So let's define
another parameter. We'll call this one t, and
I'll take the top view again. This one's getting a
little bit messy. Let me draw another top view. As you can see, this is
all about visualization. So let's say this is my
x-axis, that is my y-axis. And we said we started
here on the z-y plane. We are b away from the z-axis,
so that distance is b. In this diagram, the z-axis
is just popping out at us. It's popping out of the page. We're looking straight down. It's just like the same
view as right there. And what I just drew, when s is
equal to 0 radians, we're going to be out here, exactly
one radius further along the y-axis. And then we're going to rotate. As we rotate around, we're
going to rotate and then come all the way over here. That's when we're right over
there, and then come back down. So if you looked on the
top of the circle, it's going to look like that. Now, to make the doughnut,
we're going to have to rotate this whole setup
around the z-axis. Remember, the z-axis
is popping out. It's looking straight up at us. It's coming out of
your video screen. Now to rotate it, we're
going to rotate this circle around the z-axis. And to do that, we'll define a
parameter that tells us how much we have rotated it. So this is when we've
rotated 0 radians. At some point, we're going to
be over here, and we would have rotated it, this is b as
well, and our circle is going to be looking like this. This is maybe this point on
our doughnut, right there. At that point, we would
have rotated it, let's say p radians. So this parameter of how much
have we rotated around the z-axis, how much have we gone
around that way, we're going to call that t. And t is also going to
vary between 0 and 2 pi. And I want to make
this very clear. Let's actually draw the domain
that we're mapping from to our surface, so that we
understand this fully. So let me draw some, and then
we'll talk about how we can actually parameterize
that into a position vector-valued function. So right here, let's
call that the t-axis. That's, remember, how much
we're rotated around the z-axis right there. And let's call this
down here our s-axis. And I think this will help
things out a good bit. So when s is equal to 0, and
we vary just t, so they're both going to vary
between 0 and 2 pi. So this right here is 0,
this right here is 2 pi. Let me do some
things in between. This is pi, this would be pi
over 2 obviously, pi over 2, this would be 3 pi over 4. You do the same thing
on the p-axis. It's going to go up to 2 pi. Let's do that. So we're going to
go up to 2 pi. I really want you to visualize
this, because then the parameterization, I think, will
be fairly straightforward. So that's 2 pi, this is pi,
this is pi over 2, and then this is 3 pi over 4. So let's think about what it
looks like if you just hold s constant at 0, and we just
vary t between zero and 2 pi. And let me do that in
magenta, right here. So we're holding s constant,
and we're just varying the parameter 2 pi. So this, if you think about it,
should just form a curve in three dimensions,
not a surface. Because we're only varying
one parameter right here. So let's think about
what this is. Remember, s is, let
me draw my axes. So that is my x-axis, that
is my y-axis, and then this is my, I'm getting
messier and messier. That is my z-axis, right
actually, let me draw it a little bit bigger than that. I think it will help all
of our visualizations. All right. So this is my x-axis, that is
my y-axis, and then my z-axis goes up like that. z-axis. Now remember, when s is equal
to 0, that means we haven't rotated around this
circle at all. That means we're out here. We're going to be b away,
and then a away again. Right? We haven't rotated
around this at all. We're setting s as
equal to zero. So essentially, we're going to
be b away, so this is going to be a distance of b away, and
then we're going to be another a away. The b is the center of the
circle, and then we're going to be another a away. We're going to be
right over there. So this is a plus b away. And then we're going to vary t. Remember, t was how much we've
gone around the z-axis. These were top views over here. So this line right here, in our
s-t domain, we can say, when we map it, or parameterize it,
it'll correspond to the curve that's essentially the outer
edge of are doughnut. If this is the top view of the
doughnut, it will be the outer edge of the doughnut,
just like that. So let me draw the outer edge. And to do that a little bit
better, let me draw the axes in both the positive and
the negative domain. It might make my graph a little
bit easier to visualize things. Positive and negative domain,
this is negative z right there. So this line in our t-s plane,
I guess we could say, this magenta line, we hold s at 0
radians and we increase t, this is t is zero, this is t is
equal to 2 pi, that's t is equal to pi, this is t is equal
to 3 pi over 2, all the way back to t is equal to 2 pi. This line corresponds to that
line, as we rotate, as we increase t and hold
s constant at 0. Now let's do another point. Let's say when s is at pi,
right, remember, when s is at pi, we've gone exactly,
pi is 180 degrees. When s is at pi, we've
gone exactly 180 degrees around the circle, around
each of these circles. So we're right over there. And now let's hold it constant
at pi, and then rotate it around to form our doughnut. So we're going to form the
inside of our doughnut. So when s is at pie, and we're
going to take t from 0, so when s is pi and t is 0, we're going
to be, this was the center of our circle, we're going
to be a below that. We're going to be
right over there. And then as we vary, as we
increase t, so as we move up along, holding s at pi, and we
increase t, we're going to trace out the inside of our
doughnut, that will look something like that. That was my best
shot at drawing it. And then we can do
that multiple times. When s is pi over 2, I want to
do multiple different colors, when s is pi over 2, we've
rotated up here exactly 90 degrees, right? Pi over 2 is 90 degrees
at this point. And then if we vary t, we're
essentially tracing out the top of the doughnut, right? So let me make sure I draw it . So the cross section, the top
of the doughnut, we're going to start off right over here. So when s is pi over 2, and you
vary it right, and then you very t, I'm having trouble
drawing straight lines. And then you vary t, it's
going to look like this. That's the top of that
circle right there. The top of this circle is
going to be right there. The top of this circle is
going to be right over there. Top of the circle is going
to be right over there. So then I just
connect the dots. It's going to look
something like that. That is the top
of our doughnut. If I was doing this top view,
it would be the top of the doughnut, just like that. And if I wanted to do the
bottom of the doughnut, just to make the picture clear, if I
were to make the bottom of the doughnut, the bottom of the
doughnut would be see, if I take s as 3 pi over 4 and I
vary t, that's the bottoms of our doughnuts. So let me draw the circle, it's
right there, the circle is right there, you wouldn't be
able to see the whole thing if this wasn't transparent. So you'd be tracing out the
bottom of the doughnut, just like that. I know this graph is becoming
a little confusing, but hopefully you get the idea. When s is 2 pi again, you're
going to be back to the outside of the doughnut again. That's also going
to be in purple. So that's what happens when we
hold the s constant at certain values and vary the t. Now let's do the opposite. What happens if we hold t
at 0, and we very the s? So t is 0, that means we
haven't rotated at all yet. So we're in the z-y plane. So t is 0, and s will start at
0, and it'll go to pi over 2, that's that point over there. Then it'll go to pi. This point is the same
thing as that point. Then it will go to 3 pi over
4, then it'll come back all the way to 2 pi. So this line corresponds to
this circle, right there. We could keep doing these if we
pick when t is pi  let me use a different color, that's
not different enough. When t is pi over
2, just like that. We would have rotated around
the z-axis 90 degrees, so now we're over here. And now when we vary s, s will
start off over here, and it'll go all the way
around like that. So this line corresponds
to that circle. We could keep doing
it like this. When t is equal to pi, that
means we've got all the way around the circle like that,
and now when we vary s from 0 to pi over 2, we're going to
start all the way over here, and then we're going to vary,
all the way, we're going to go down and hit all those contours
that we talked about before, and I'll do one more, just
to kind of make this, the scaffold, clear. This dark purple,
hopefully you can see it. When t is 3 pi over 4,
we've rotated all the way. So we're in the x-z plane. And then when you vary s, s
will start off over here, and as you increase s, you're going
to go around the circle, around the circle, just like that. And of course, when you get all
the way back full circle, t over pi over 2, that's
the same thing. You're back over here again. So this is going to be, we can
even shade it the same color. And hopefully you're
getting a sense now of the parameterization. I haven't done any math yet. I haven't actually showed you
how to mathematically represent it as a vector value function,
but hopefully you're getting a sense of what it means to
parameterize by two parameters. And just to get an idea of what
these areas on our s-t plane correspond to onto this
surface, in I guess you could say, in R3, this little square
right here, let's see what's bounded by. This little square, I want to
make sure I picked a square that I can draw neatly. So this square right here, that
is between, when you look at t, it's between 0 and pi over 2. And s is between
0 and pi over 2. So this right here is
this part of our torus. If you're looking at it from
the top, it would look like that, right there. You can imagine, we've
transformed this square. I haven't even shown you how
to do it mathematically yet. But we've transformed
this square to this part of the doughnut. Now, I think we've done about
as much as I can do on the visualization side. I'll stop this video here. In the next video, we're going
to actually talk about, how do we actually parameterize
using these two parameters? Remember, s takes around each
of these circles, and then t takes us around the z-axis. And if you take all of the
combinations of s and t, you're going to have every point
along the surface of this torus or this doughnut. How do you actually go from an
s and a t that goes from 0 to 2 pi, in both cases, and turn
it into a three-dimensional position vector-valued function
that would define this surface? We're going to do that
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Determining a position vector-valued function for a parametrization of two parameters | Khan Academy
In the last video, we started
to talk about how to parameterize a torus,
or a doughnut shape. And the two parameters we were
using, and I spent a lot of time trying to visualize
it, because this is all about visualization. I think this is really the
hard thing to do here. But the way we can parameterize
a torus, which is the surface of this doughnut, is to say say
hey, let's take a point let's rotate it around a circle. It could be any circle. I picked a circle
in the z-y plane. And how far it's gone around
that circle, we'll parameterize that by s, and s can go between
0 all the way to 2 pi, and then we're going to rotate this
circle around itself. Or I guess a better way to say
it, we're going to rotate the circle around the z-axis, and
it's all at the center of the circle, so we're always going
to keep a distance b away. And so these were top
views right there. And then we defined our second
parameter t, which tells us how far the entire circle has
rotated around the z-axis access. And those were our two
parameter definitions. And then here we tried to
visualize what happens. This is kind of the domain
that our parameterization is going to be defined on. s goes between 0 and 2 pi,
so when t is 0, we haven't rotated out of the z-y plane. s is at 0, goes all the
way to 2 pi over there. Then when t goes to 2 pi, we've
kind of moved our circle. We've moved it along,
we've rotated around the z-axis a bit. And then this line in our s-t
domain corresponds to that circle in 3 dimensions,
or in our x-y-z space. Now given that, hopefully we
visualize it pretty well. Let's think about actually how
to define a position vector-valued function that is
essentially this parameterization. So let's first to do
the z, because that's pretty straightforward. So let's look at this
view right here. What's our z going to
be as a function? So our x's, our y's, and
our z's should all be a function of s and t. That's what it's all about. Any position in space should
be a function of picking a particular t and
a particular s. And we saw that over here. This point right here, let
me actually do that with a couple of points. This point right there,
that corresponds to that point, right there. Then we pick another one. This point right here,
corresponds to this point, right over there. I can do a few more. Let me pick. This point right here,
so s is still 0. That's going to be this outer
edge, way out over there. I'll pick one more, just
to define this square. This point right over here,
where we haven't rotated t at all, but we've gone a quarter
way around the circle, is that point right there. So for any s and t we're
mapping it to a point in x-y-z space. So our z's, our x's, and
our y's should all be a function of s and t. So the first one to think
about is just the z. I think this will be
pretty straightforward. So z as a function of s and
t is going to equal what? Well, if you take any circle,
remember s is how the angle between our radius
and the x-y plane. So I can even draw
it over here. Let me do it in another color. I'm running out of colors. So let's say that this is
a radius, right there. That angle, we said, that is s. So if I were to draw that
circle out, just like that, we can do a little
bit of trigonometry. The angle is s. We know the radius is
a, the radius of our circle, we defined that. So z is just going to be the
distance above the x-y plane. It's going to be this
distance, right there. And that's straightforward
trigonometry. That's going to be a, I mean,
we can do SOCATOA and all of that, you might want
to review the videos. But the sine, you can
view it this way. So if this is z right there,
you could say that the sine of s, SOCATOA is the opposite
over the hypotenuse, is equal to a z over a. Multiply both sides by a, you
have a sine s is equal to z. That tells us how much above
the x-y plane we are. Just some simple trigonometry. So z of s and t, it's only
going to be a function of s. It's going to be a
times the sine of s. Not too bad. Now see if we can figure out
what x and y are going to be. Remember, z doesn't matter. Doesn't matter how much we've
rotated around the z-axis. What matters is, how much we've
rotated around the circle. If s is 0, we're just going
to be in the x-y plane, z is going to be zero. If s is pi over 2, up here,
then we're going to be traveling around the
top of the doughnut. And we're going to be exactly
a above the x-y plane, or z is going to be equal to a. Hopefully that makes
reasonable sense to you. Now let's think about what
happens as we rotate around. Remember, these two
are top views. We are looking down
on this doughnut. So the center of each of these
circles is b away from the origin, or from the z-axis,
what we're rotating around. It's always b away. So our x-coordinate, or our x-
and y-coordinate, so if we go to the center of the circle
here, we're going to be b away, and this is going to be b
away, right over there. So let's think about where we
are in the x-y plane, or how far the part of our, what
we're, I guess you could imagine, if you were to project
our point into the x-y plane, how far is that going
to be from our origin? Well, it's always going to
be, remember, let's go back to this drawing here. This might be the
most instructive. This is just one particular
circle on the z-y plane, but it could be any of them. If this is the z-axis, over
here, this distance right here is always going to be b. We know that for sure. And so what is this
distance going to be? We're at b to the center, and
then we're going to have some angle s, and so depending on
that angle s, this distance onto, I guess, the x-y plane,
you know, if we're sitting on the x-y plane, how far are
we from the z-axis, or the projection onto the x-y plane. Or you can, you know, the
x or the y position. I'm saying it as many
ways as possible. I think you're visualizing it. If z is a sine of theta, this
distance right here, this little shorter distance right
here, that's going to be a cosine if s. s is that angle right there. This distance right here is
going to be a cosine of s. So if we talk about just
straight distance from the origin, along the x-y plane,
our distance is always going to be b plus a cosine of s. When s is out here, then it's
actually going to become a negative number, and that makes
sense, because our distance is going to be less than b. We're going to be at
that point right there. So if you look at this top
views over here, no matter where we are, that is b. And let's say we've
rotated a little bit. That distance right here, if
you're looking along the x-y plane, that is always going
to be b plus a cosine of s. That's what that distance
is to any given point. We're depending on
our s's and t's. Now, as we rotate around, if
we're at a point here, let's say we're at a point there, and
that point, we already said, is b plus a cosine of s, away from
the origin, on the xy plane. What are the x and y
coordinates of that? Well, remember. This is a top-down. We're sitting on the z-axis
looking straight down the x-y plane right now. We're looking down
on the doughnut. So what are our x's
and y's going to be? Well, you draw another
right triangle right here. You have another
right triangle. This angle right here is t. This distance right here
is going to be this times the sine of our angle. So this right here, which is
essentially our x, this is going to be our x-coordinate, x
as a function of s and t, os going to be equal to the sine
of t, t is our angle right there, times this radius. Times, we could write
it either way, times b plus a cosine of s. Because remember, how far we
are depends on how much around the circle we are, right? When we're over here,
we're much further away. Here we're exactly b away,
if you're looking only on the x-y plane. And then over here, we're
b minus a away, if we're on the x-y plane. So that's x as a
function of s and t. And actually, the way I defined
it right here, our positive x-axis would actually
go in this direction. So this is x positive, this is
x in the negative direction. I could've flipped the signs,
but hopefully, you know, this actually make sense that that
would be the positive x, this is the negative x. Depends on whether using a
right-handed or left-handed coordinate system, but
hopefully that makes sense. We're just saying, OK, what is
this distance right here that is b plus a cosine of s? We got that from this right
here, when we're taking a view, just a cut of the torus. That's how far we are, in kind
of the x-y direction at any point, or kind of radially
out, without thinking about the height. And then if you want the
x-coordinate, you multiply it times the sine of t, the way
I've had it up here, and the y-coordinate is going to be
this, right here, the way we've set up this triangle. So y as a function of s and t
is going to be equal to the cosine of t times this radius. b plus a cosine of s. And so our parameterization,
and you know, just play with this triangle, and hopefully
it'll make sense. I mean, if you say that this is
our y-coordinate right here, you just do SOCATOA, cosine of
t, CA is equal to adjacent, which is y, right, this is
the angle right here, over the hypotenuse. Over b plus a cosine of s. Multiply both sides of the
equation times this, and you get y of s of t is equal to
cosine of t times this thing, right there. Let me copy and paste
all of our takeaways. And we're done with
our parameterization. We could leave it just like
this, but if we want to represent it as a position
vector-valued function, we can define it like this. Find a nice color, maybe pink. So let's say our position
vector-valued function is r. It's going to be a function of
two parameters, s and t, and it's going to be equal
to its x-value. Let me do that in
the same color. So it's going to be, I'll
do this part first. b plus a cosine of s times sine
of t, and that's going to go in the x-direction, so we'll
say that's times i. And this case, remember,
the way I defined it, the positive x-direction
is going to be here. So the i-unit vector
will look like that. i will go in that direction,
the way I've defined things. And then plus our y-value is
going to be b plus a cosine of s times cosine of t in the
y-unit vector direction. Remember, the j-unit vector
will just go just like that. That's our j-unit vector. And then, finally, we'll throw
in the z, which was actually the most straightforward. plus a sine of s times the
k-unit vector, which is the unit vector in the z-direction. So times the k-unit vector. And so you give me, now, any s
and t within this domain right here, and you put it into this
position vector-valued function, it'll give you the
exact position vector that specifies the appropriate
point on the torus. So if you pick, let's just
make sure we understand what we're doing. If you pick that point right
there, where s and t are both equal to pi over 2, and you
might even want to go through the exercise. Take pi over 2 in all of these. Actually, let's do it. So in that case, so when r of
pi over 2, what do we get? It's going to be b plus a
times cosine of pi over 2. Cosine of pi over
2 is 0, right? Cosine of 90 degrees. So it's going to be b, right,
this whole thing is going to be 0, times sine of pi over 2. Sine of pi over 2 is just 1. So it's going to be b times i
plus, once again, cosine of pi over 2 is 0, so this term right
here is going to be b, and then cosine of pi over 2 is 0,
so it's going to be 0 j. So it's going to be plus 0 j. And then finally, pi over 2,
well, there's no t here, sine of pi over 2 is 1. So plus a times k. So there's actually
no j-direction. So this is going to be equal
to b times i plus a times k. So the point that it specifies,
according to this parameterization, or the vector
[UNINTELLIGIBLE], is b times i plus a times k. So b times i will get us right
out there, and then a times k ill get us right over there. So the position of the
vector being specified is right over there. Just as we predicted. That dot, that point right
there, corresponds to that point, just like that. Of course, I picked points it
was easy to calculate, but this whole, when you take every s
and t in this domain right here, you're going to
transform it to this surface. And this is the
transformation, right here. And of course, we have to
specify that s is between, we could write it multiple ways. s is between 2 pi and 0,
and we could also say t is between 2 pi and 0. And you could, you know, we're
kind of overlapping one extra time at 2 pi, so maybe we can
get rid of one of these equal signs if you like, although
that won't necessarily change the area any, if you're
taking the surface area. But hopefully this gives you at
least a gut sense, or more than a gut sense, of how to
parameterize these things, and what we're even doing, because
it's going to be really important when we start talking
about surface integrals. And the hardest thing about
doing all of this is just the visualization. 

Transcript for: Partial derivatives of vector-valued functions | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's have the vector valued
function r of s and t is equal to well, x is going to
be a function of s and t. So we'll just write it as x of
s and t times the x unit vector, or i, plus y of s and t
times the y unit factor, or j, plus x of s and t times
the z unit vector, k. So given that we have this
vector valued function, let's define or let's think about
what it means to take the partial derivative of this
vector valued function with respect to one of the
parameters, s or t. I think it's going to be
pretty natural, nothing completely bizarre here. We've taken partial derivatives
of non-vector valued functions before, where we only vary
one of the variables. We only take it with
respect to one variable. You hold the other
one constant. We're going to do the
exact same thing here. And we've taken regular
derivatives of vector valued functions. The path in those just ended up
being the regular derivative of each of the terms. And we're going to see, it's
going to be the same thing here with the partial derivative. So let's define the
partial derivative of r with respect to s. And everything I do with
respect to s, you can just swap it with t, and you're going to
get the same exact result. I'm going to define it as being
equal to the limit as delta s approaches 0 of r
of s plus delta s. Only finding the limit
with respect to a change in s comma t. We're holding t, as you can
imagine, constant for given t, minus r of s and t. All of that over delta s. Now, if you do a little bit of
algebra here, you literally, you know r of s plus delta s
comma t, that's the same thing as x of s plus delta s
t i, plus y of s plus delta s t j, plus z. All that minus this thing. If you do a little bit of
algebra with that, and if you don't believe me, try it out. This is going to be equal to
the limit of delta s approaching 0 and I'm going
to write it small because it'd take up a lot of space of x
of s plus delta s comma t minus x of s and t, I think you
know where I'm going. This is all a little bit
monotonous to write it all out, but never hurts. Times s or divided by delta s
times i and then I'll do it in different colors, so it's
less monotonous plus y. Where every those limited
delta s [? approaches ?] 0 applies to every term
I'm writing out here. y of s plus delta s comma t
minus y of s comma t, all of that over delta s times j. And then finally, plus z of s
plus delta s comma t minus z of s and t, all of that over delta
s times the z unit vector, k. And this all comes out
of this definition. If you literally just put s
plus delta s in place for s you evaluate all this, do a
little algebra you're going to get the exact same thing. And this, hopefully, pops out
at you as, gee, we're just taking the partial derivative
of each of these functions with respect to s. And these functions right here,
this x of s and t, this is a non-vector valued function. This y, this is also a
non-vector valued function. z is also a non-vector
valued function. When you put them all together,
it becomes a vector valued function, because we're
multiplying the first one times a vector. The second one times
another vector. The third one times
another vector. But independently,
these functions are non-vector valued. So this is just the
definition of the regular partial derivatives. Where we're taking the limit
as delta s approaches 0 in each of these cases. So this is the
exact same thing. This is equal to this is the
exact same thing as the partial derivative of x with respect to
s times i plus the partial derivative y with respect to s
times j plus the partial derivative of z with
respect to s times k. I'm going to do one more thing
here and this is pseudo mathy, but it's going to come out
the whole reason I'm even doing this video, is it's going to
give us some good tools in our tool kit for the videos that
I'm about to do on surface integrals. So I'm going to do one thing
here that's a little pseudo mathy, and that's really
because differentials are these things that are very hard to
define rigorously, but I think it'll give you the intuition
of what's going on. So this thing right here, I'm
going to say this is also equal to and you're not going to
see this in any math textbook, and hard core mathematicians
are going to kind of cringe when they see me do this. But I like to do it because
I think it'll give you the intuition on what's going
on when we take our surface integrals. So I'm going to say that this
whole thing right here, that that is equal to r of s plus
the differential of s a super small change in s t minus r
of s and t, all of that over that same super
small change in s. So hopefully you understand
at least why I view things this way. When I take the limit as delta
s approaches 0, these delta s's are going to get super
duper duper small. And in my head, that's how
I imagine differentials. When someone writes the
derivative of y with respect to x and let's say that they say
that that is 2 and we've done a little bit of math with
differentials before. You can imagine multiplying
both sides by dx, and you could get dy is equal to 2dx. We've done this
throughout calculus. The way I imagine it is super
small change in y infinitely small change in y is equal to
2 times though, you can imagine an equally
small change in x. So it's a well, if you have a
super small change in x, your change in y is going to be
still super small, but it's going to be 2 times that. I guess that's the
best way to view it. But in general, I view
differentials as super small changes in a variable. So with that out of the way,
and me explaining to you that many mathematicians would
cringe at what I just wrote, hopefully this gives you a
little this isn't like some crazy thing I did. I'm just saying, oh, delta
s as delta approaches 0, I kind of imagine that as ds. And the whole reason I did
that, is if you take this side and that side, and multiply
both sides times this differential ds,
then what happens? The left hand side, you get the
partial of r with respect to s is equal to this times ds. I'll do ds in maybe pink. Times ds this is just
a regular differential, super small change in s. This is a kind of a partial,
with respect to s. That's going to be equal to
well, if you multiply this side of the equation times ds, this
guy's going to disappear. So it's going to be r of s,
plus our super small change in s, t minus r of s and t. Now let me put a little
square around this. This is going to be valuable
for us in the next video. We're going to actually think
about what this means and how to visualize this on a surface. As you can imagine, this
is a vector right here. You have 2 vector valued
functions and you're taking the difference. And we're going to visualize
it in the next video. It's going to really help
us with surface integrals. By the same exact logic, we
can do everything we did here with s, we can do
it with t, as well. So we can define the partial
I'll draw a little I can define the partial of r with
respect let me do it in a different color, completely
different color. It's orange. The partial of r with respect
to t the definition is just right here. The limit as delta t approaches
0 of r of s t plus delta t minus r of s and t. In this situation we're
holding the s, you can imagine, in constant. We're finding its change in
t, all of that over delta t. And the same thing falls out. This is equal to the partial of
x with respect to ti plus y with respect to tj, plus
z with respect to tk. Same exact thing, you just kind
of swap the s's and the t's. And by that same logic,
you'd have the same result but in terms of t. If you do this pseudo mathy
thing that I did up here, then you would get the partial of r
with respect to t times a super small change in t. dt, our
t differential, you could imagine, is equal to r of st
plus dt minus r of s and t. So let's box these
two guys away. And in the next video,
we're going to actually visualize what these mean. And sometimes, when you kind of
do a bunch of like, silly math like this, you're always like,
all right, what is this all about? Remember, all I did is I said,
what does it mean to take the derivative of this with
respect to s or t? Played around with it a little
bit, I got this result. These 2 are going to be very
valuable for us, I think, in getting the intuition for
why surface integrals look the way they do. 

Transcript for: Introduction to the surface integral | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last video, we finished
off with these two results. We started off just thinking
about what it means to take the partial derivative of
vector-valued function, and I got to these kind of, you might
call them, bizarre results. You know, what was the whole
point in getting here, Sal? And the whole point is so that
I can give you the tools you need to understand what
a surface integral is. So let's just think about,
let's draw the st plane, and then see how it gets
transformed into this surface r. So let's do that. Let's say that is the t-axis,
and let's say that that is the s-axis, and let's say that our
vector-valued function, our positioned vector-valued
function, is defined from s's between a and b, I'm just
picking arbitrary boundaries, and between t being
equal to c and d. So the area under question, if
you take any t and any s in this rectangle right here, it
will be mapped to part of that surface. And if you map each of these
points, you will eventually get the surface r. So let me draw r
in 3 dimensions. A surface in 3D. So that is our x-axis, that
is our y-axis, and then that is the z-axis. And just as a bit of a
reminder, it might look something like this. If we were to, this point right
here, where s is equal to a, and t is equal to c, remember,
we're going to draw the surface indicated by the position
vector function s, r of s and t. So this point right here, when
s is a and t is c, maybe it maps to, I'm just, you
know, that point! Right there. When you take a and c, and you
put it into this thing over here, you're just going to get
the vector that points at that. So you could say, it'll
give you a position vector that'll point right at that
position, right there. And then, let's say that this
line, right here, if we were to hold s constant at a, and if we
were to just vary t from c to d, maybe that looks
something like this. I'm just drawing some
arbitrary contour there. Maybe if we hold t constant at
c, and vary s from a to b, maybe that'll look at
something like that. I don't know. I'm just trying to
show you an example. So this point right here would
correspond to that point right there, when you put it into the
vector-valued function r, you would get a vector that points
to that point, just like that. And this point right here in
purple, when you evaluate r of s and t, it'll give you a
vector that points right there, to that point over there, and
we could do a couple of other points, just to get an idea of
what the surface looks like, although I'm trying to keep
things as general as possible. So maybe, let me do it
in this bluish color. This, if we hold p at d and
vary s from a to b, we're going to start here. This is when t is d and s is a. And when you vary it, maybe
you get something like that. I don't know. So this point right here would
correspond to a vector that points to that point, right
there, and then finally this line, or this, if we hold s at
b and vary t between c and d, we're going to go from that
point, to that point. So it's going to look something
like this oh, sorry, we're going to go from this
point to that point. We're holding s at b, varying
t from c to d, maybe it looks something like that. So our surface, we went from
this nice rectangular area in the ts plane, and it gets
transformed into this wacky-looking surface. We could even draw some
other things right here. Let's say we get some
arbitrary value. Let me pick a new color,
I'll do it in white. Or a new noncolor. And let's say if we hold s at
that constant value and we vary t, maybe that will look
for something like this. Maybe that we'll look something
like, well, I don't know. Maybe it'll look
something like that. So you get an idea of what
the surface might look like. Now, given this, I want
to think about what these quantities are. And then when we visualize what
these quantities are, we'll be able to kind of use these
results of the last videos to do something that I
think will be useful. So let's say that we
pick arbitrary s and t. So this is the point, let me
just we pick it right here. That is the point s, t. s comma t. If you were to put those values
in here maybe it maps to, and I want to make sure I'm
consistent with everything I've drawn, maybe it maps to
this point right here. Maybe it maps to that
point right there. So this point right here,
that is r of s and t. For a particular s and t. I mean, I could put little
subscripts here, but I want to be general. I could call this a, well,
I already used a and b. I could call this x and y,
this would be r of x and y. It would map to that
point, right there. So that right there,
or that right there. Now let's see what happens
if we take, if we move just in the s direction. So this is we could
do that as s. Now let us move forward
by a differential, by a super small amount of s. So this right here, let's
call that a s plus a super small differential in s. That's right there. So that point. Let me do that in a better
color, in this yellow. So that point right there
is the point s plus my differential of s. I could write delta s, but
I wanted a super small change in s, comma t. And what is that going
to get mapped to? Well, if we apply these two
point in r, we're going to get something that maybe
is right over there. And I want to be very clear. This right here, that is
r of s plus ds comma t. That's what that is. That's the point when we just
shift s by a super small differential, this distance
here, you can view as ds. It's a super small change in s. And then when we map it or
transform it, or put that point into our vector-valued
function, let me copy and paste the original vector-valued
function, just so we have a good image of what we're
talking about this whole time. Let me put it right down there. So just to be clear what's
going on, when we took this little blue point right here,
this s and t, and we put the s and t values here, we get a
vector that points to that point on the surface,
right there. When you add a ds to your
s-values, you get a vector that points at that
yellow point right there. So going back to the results we
got in the last presentation, or the last video,
what is this? r of s plus delta s, or r of s
plus ds, the differential of s, t, well, that is
that, right there. That is the vector that
points to that position. This right here is a vector
that points to this blue position. So what is the difference
of those two vectors? And this is a bit of
basic vector math, you might remember. The difference of these two
vectors, head to tails. The difference of these
two vectors is going to be this vector. If you subtract this vector
that vector, you're going to get that vector, right there. A vector that looks
just like that. So that's what this is
equal to, that vector. And it makes sense. This blue vector plus the
orange vector, this vector, right here, plus the orange
vector, is equal to this vector. It makes complete sense. Heads to tails. So that's what that represents. Now let's do the same
thing in the t direction. I'm running out of color. I'll go back to the pink,
or maybe the magenta. So we had that s and t. Now if we go up a little bit,
in that direction, let's say that that is t, so this is the
point s, t plus a super small change in t, that's that
point right there. This distance right there is
dt, you can view it that way. If you put s and t plus dt into
our vector value function, what are you to get? You're going to get a vector
that maybe points to this point, right here. Maybe I'll draw it right here. Maybe it points to this
point, right here. A vector that points
right there. So that will be mapped to a
vector that points to that position, right over there. Now by the same argument that
we did on the s-side, this point, or the vector that
points to that, that is r of st plus dt. That is the exact same thing
as that right there, and of course, this, we already saw. This is the same thing
as that over there. So what is that vector
minus this blue vector? The magenta vector
minus the blue vector? Well, once again, this
is hopefully a bit of a review of adding vectors. It's going to be a vector
that looks like this. I'll do it in white. It's going to be a vector
that looks like that. And you can imagine, if you
take the blue vector plus the white vector, the blue vector
plus this white vector is going to equal this purple vector. So it makes sense, if the
purple vector minus the blue vector is going to be equal
to this white vector. So something interesting
is going on here. I have these two, this is a
vector that is kind of going along this parameterized
surface, as we changed our s by a super small amount. And then this is a vector that
is going along our surface if we change our t by a
super small amount. Now, you may or may not
remember this, and I've done several videos where
I showed this to you. But the magnitude, if I take 2
vectors, and I take their cross product, so if I take the cross
product of a and b, and I take the magnitude of the resulting
vector remember, when you take the cross product, you
get a third vector that is perpendicular to both of these. But if you were just to take
the magnitude of that vector, that is equal to the area
of a parallelogram, defined by a and b. What do I mean by that? Well, if that is vector a and
that is vector b, that's a and that is b, if you were to just
take the cross product of those two, you're going to
get a third vector. You're going to get a third
vector that's perpendicular to both of them, it kind
of popped out of the page. That would be a cross b. But the magnitude of this, so
if you just take a cross product, you're going
to get a vector. But then if you take the
magnitude of that vector, you're just saying, how
big is that vector, how long is that vector? That's going to be the
area of the parallelogram defined by a and b. And I've proved that in the
linear algebra videos, maybe I'll prove it again in this. I mean it's because well, I
won't go into that in detail. I've done it before, don't want
to make this video too long. So the parallelogram defined by
a and b, you just imagine a, and then take another kind of
parallel version of a, is right over there, and another
parallel version of b is right over there. So this is the parallelogram
defined by a and b. So, going back to our surface
example, if we were to take the cross product of this orange
vector and this white vector, I'm going to get the surface
area, I'm going to get the area of the parallelogram, defined
by these two vectors. So if I take the parallel
to that one, it will look something like this, and then a
parallel to the orange one it will look something like that. So if I take the cross product
of that and that, I'm going to get the area of that
parallelogram. Now you might say, this is a
surface, you're taking a straight-up parallelogram,
but remember, these are super small changes. So you can imagine, a surface
can be broken up into super small changes in
parallelograms, or infinitely many parallelograms. And the more parallelograms you
have, the better approximation of the surface you're
going to have. And this is no different than
when we first took integrals. We approximated the area
under the curve with a bunch of rectangles. The more rectangles
we had, the better. So let's call this little
change in our surface d sigma, for a little change, for a
little amount of our surface. And we could even say that, you
know, the surface area of the surface will be the infinite
sum of all of these infinitely small d sigmas. And there's actually a
little notation for that. So surface area is equal to, we
could integrate over the surface, and the notation
usually is a capital sigma for a surface as opposed to a
region or so you're integrating over the surface,
and you do a double integral, because you're going in
two directions, right? A surface is a kind of a
folded, two-dimensional structure. And you're going to take
the infinite sum of all of the d sigmas. So this would be
the surface area. So that's what a d sigma is. Now we just figured out, we
just said, well, that d sigma can be represented, that value,
that area, of that little part of the surface, of that
parallelogram, can be represented as a cross product
of those two vectors. So let me write here. And this is not
rigorous mathematics. The whole point here is to give
you the intuition of what a surface integral is all about. So we can write that d sigma is
equal to the cross product of the orange vector and
the white vector. The orange vector is
this, but we could also write it like this. This was the result
from the last video. I'll write it in orange. So the partial of r with
respect to, I'm running out of space, with respect to s, ds,
and it's going well, d sigma is going to be the magnitude
of the cross product, not just the cross product. The cross product by itself
will just give you a vector, and that's going to be useful
when we start doing vector-valued surface
integrals, but just think about it this way. So this orange vector is
the same thing is that. And we're going to take
the cross product of that with this white vector. This white vector is the same
thing as that, which we saw, which was the same
thing as this. The partial of r with
respect to t, dt. And we saw, if we take the
magnitude of that, that's going to be equal to our little small
change in area, or the area of this little
parallelogram over here Now, you may or may not
remember that if you take these, so let's just be clear. This and this, these
are vectors, right? When you take the partial
derivative of a vector-valued function, you're still
getting a vector. This ds, this is a number. That's a number and
that's a number. And you might remember, when
we, in the linear algebra or whenever you first saw taking
cross products, taking the cross product of some
scalar multiple. You can take the scalars out. So if we take this number and
that number, we essentially factor them out of
the cross product. This is going to be equal to
the magnitude of the cross product of the partial of r,
with respect to s, crossed with the partial of r with respect
to t, and then all of that times these two
guys, over here. Times ds and dt. So I wrote this here, hey,
maybe our surface area, if we were to take the sum of all of
these little d sigmas, but there's no obvious way
to evaluate that. But we know that all of the d
sigmas, they're the same thing as if you take all of the
ds's and all of the dt's. So you take all of the
ds's, all of the dt's. So this is a ds
times a dt, right? A ds times a dt, ds times
a dt is right there. If we multiply this times the
cross product of the partial derivative, this times this is
going to give us this area. So if we summed up all of this
times this, or this times this, if we summed them up over this
entire region, we will get all of the parallelograms
in this region. We will get the surface area. So we can write I know this
is all a little bit convoluted. And you need to kind of
ponder a little bit. Surface intervals, at least in
my head, are one of the hardest things to really visualize, but
it all hopefully makes sense. So we can say that this thing
right over here, the sum of all of the little parallelograms on
our surface, or the surface area, is going to be equal to,
instead of taking the sum over the surface, let's take the sum
of all the ds times dt's over this region right here. And of course, we're also
going to have to take this cross product here. And we know how to do that. That's a double integral. for going to take the double
integral over this, we could call it this region, or
this area, right here. That area is the same thing
as that whole area, right over there, of this thing. I'll just write it in yellow. Of the cross product of the
partial of r with respect to s, and the partial of
r with respect to t. ds and dt. And so you literally just take,
and it seems very convoluted in how you're going to actually
evaluate it, but we were able to express this thing called a
surface well, this is a very simple surface integral in
something that we can actually calculate. And in the next few videos, I'm
going to show you examples of actually calculating it. Now, this right here will only
give you the surface area. But what if, at every point
here so over here what we've done in both of these
expressions, is we're just figuring out the surface area
of each of these parallelograms and then adding them all up. That's what we're doing. But what if, associated with
each of those little parallelograms, we had some
value, where that value is defined by some third
function f of x, y, z? So every parallelogram, it's
super small, it's around a point, you can say it's maybe
the center of it, doesn't have to be the center. But maybe the center of it
is at some point in three-dimensional space, and if
you use some other function, f of x, y, and z, you'll get the
value of that point. And what we want to do is
figure out what happens if for every one of those
parallelograms, we were to multiply it times the value of
the function at that point? So we could write it this way. So this is where, you can
imagine, the function is just one. We're just multiplying each of
the parallelograms by one. But we could imagine we're
multiplying each of the little parallelograms by f of x, y,
and z, d sigma, and it's going to be the exact same thing,
where this is each of the little parallelograms, we're
just going to multiply it by f of x, y, and z there. So we're going to integrate
it over the area, over that region, of f of x, y, and z,
and then times the magnitude of the partial of r with respect
to f, crossed with the partial of r with respect to t, ds, dt. And of course, we're
integrating with respect to s and t. Hopefully we can express this
function in terms of s and t, and we should be able
to, because we have a parameterization there. Wherever we see an x
there, it's really x is a function of s and t. y is a function of s and t. z is a function of s and t. And this might look super
convoluted and hard. And the visualizations for
this, of why you'd want to do this, it has
applications in physics. It's a little hard
to visualize. It's easier just to visualize
the straight-up surface area. But we're going to see the next
few videos that it's a little hairy to calculate these
problems, but they're not too hard to do. That you just kind of
have to stick with them. 

Transcript for: Example of calculating a surface integral part 1 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
We saw several videos ago that
we can parameterize a torus or a doughnut shape as a position
vector-valued function of two parameters. And this is the
outcome that we had. I think I did it over
several videos because it was a bit hairy. And I'll write our position
vector-valued function first. So we have r as a function of
our two parameters s and t. And then I'll review a little
bit of what all the terms what the s, the t, and the
a's and the b's represent. But it's equal to b
plus a cosine of s. And once again, we saw
this several videos ago. So you might want to watch the
videos on parameterizing surfaces with two parameters to
figure out how we got here. Times the sine of t. I'm going to put the s
terms and the t terms in different colors. Times our i unit vector. I'll put the vectors,
or the unit vectors in this orange color. Plus I'll do it in
the same yellow. Plus b plus a cosine of s times
cosine of t times the j unit vector the unit factor
in the y direction. Plus a sine of s times the
k unit vector or the unit vector in the z direction. And in order to generate the
torus or the doughnut shape, this is true for our
parameters so we don't wrap multiple times around the
torus for s being between 0 and 2 pi and for t being
between 0 and 2 pi. And just as a bit of review,
we're all of this came from and I'm going to have to do
what my plan is for this video over several videos. But let's review where
all of this came from. Let me draw a doughnut. My best effort at a
doughnut right here. That looks like a
doughnut or a torus. And you can imagine a torus, or
this doughnut shape is kind of the product of two circles. You have the circle that's
kind of the cross section of the doughnut at any point. You could take it there. You could take it over there. And then you have the circle
that kind of wraps around all of these other circles or these
other circles wrap around it. And so, when we derived this
formula up here or this parameterization, a was the
radius of these cross sectional circles. That's a. That's what these a terms were. And b was the distance from the
center of our torus out to the center of these cross sections. So this was b. So you can imagine that b is
kind of the radius of the big circle up to the midpoint of
the, I guess, cross section. And a is the radius of the
cross sectional circles. And when we parameterized it,
the parameter s was essentially telling us how far s was
telling us how far or where are we wrapping around this circle. So it's an angle from 0
to 2 pi to say where we are on that circle. And t tells us how much
we've rotated around the larger circle. So if you think about it, you
can specify any point on this doughnut or on this surface or
on this torus by telling you an s or a t. And so that's why we picked
that as the parameterization. Now, the whole reason why I'm
even revisiting this stuff that we saw several videos ago is
we're going to actually use it to compute an actual
surface integral. And the surface integral we're
going to compute will tell us the surface area of this torus. So this surface right here is
sigma, like that and it's being represented by this position
vector-valued function. That is parameterized by these
two parameters right there. And if we wanted to figure out
the surface area, if we just kind of set it as the surface
integral we saw in, I think, the last video at least the
last vector calculus video I did that this is a surface
integral over the surface. Here this capital Sigma does
not represent a sum, it represents a surface of a bunch
of the little d sigmas a bunch of the little
chunks of the surface. And just as a review, you
can imagine each d sigma is a little patch of the
surface right there. That is a d sigma. It's a double integral here
because we want to add up all of the d sigmas
in 2 directions. You can imagine one kind of
rotating this way around the torus and then the other
direction is going in the other direction around the torus. So that's why it's
a double integral. And this is just going to give
you the surface area, which is the whole point of this video
and probably the next one or two videos. But if you wanted to also
multiply these sigmas times some other value there's some
scalar field that this is in that you cared about you
could put that other value right there. But here we're just
multiplying it by 1. And we saw in the last video
that it's a way of expressing an idea, but you really can't
do much computation with this. But a way that you can express
this so that you can actually take the integral, you say this
is the same thing and we saw this in the last
several videos. This is the same thing as the
double integral over the region over which our
parameters are defined. So it's this region over here
where s and t go from 0 to 2 pi of whatever function this is. We just have a 1 here, so we
could just write a 1 if we like; it doesn't change much. Times and this is
what we learned. Times the magnitude of the
partial derivative of r with respect to s. The magnitude of that crossed
with the partial derivative of r with respect to t ds. You could take it in
either order, but ds dt. So we saw this in
the last video. What we're going to do now
is actually compute this. That's the whole
point of this video. We're going to take the cross
product of these two vectors. So let's figure out
these vectors. Then in the next video
we're going to take the cross product. And then the video after that
we'll actually evaluate this double integral. And you're going to see it's a
pretty hairy problem and this is probably the reason that
very few people ever see an actual surface integral
get computed. But let's do it anyway. So the partial derivative of
r with respect to s so this term right here. We'll do the cross product
in the next video. This term is what? We just want to hold t
constant and took the partial with respect to just s. So this up here, if you
distributed the sine of t times b that's just going to be a
constant in terms of s, so we can ignore that. Then you have sine of t
times this over here. So sine of t and
a is a constant. And you take the derivative
of cosine of s. That's negative sine of s. So the derivative of this with
respect to s or the partial with respect to s is going to
be minus a I'll write in green the sine of t, so you
know that's where it came from. Sine of t and then sine of s. The derivative of this
is negative sine of s. That's where that
negative came from. And then I'll write the
sine of s right there. Times the unit vector i. That's the partial of just this
x term with respect to s. And then we'll do the
same thing with the y term or the j term. So plus same logic b times
cosine of t with respect to s. When you take the
partial [INAUDIBLE] becomes 0 so you're left with
a well, it's going to be a minus a again because when you
take the derivative of the cosine of s it's going to
be negative sine of s. Let me do it. You're going to have a minus a. This cosine of t. Minus a cosine of t. That's the constant terms. Sine of s. Just taking partial
derivatives. Sine of s j. And then finally, we take
the derivative of this with respect to s. And that's pretty
straightforward. It's just going to
be a cosine of s. So plus a cosine of s k. Now hopefully you didn't
find this confusing. The negative sines because
the derivative of cosines are negative sines. So negative sine of s. That's why it's negative sine
of s times the constant. Negative sine of s times the
constant the constant cosine of t sine of t. So hopefully this makes some
sense just as a review of taking a partial derivative. Now let's do the same
thing with respect to t. And I'll do that in
a different color. So we're now going to take the
partial of r with respect to t. So the partial of r with
respect to t is equal to so now this whole term over here
is a constant, and so it's going to be that whole term
times the derivative of this with respect to t, which
is just cosine of t. So it's going to be b
plus a cosine of s times cosine of t i. And then, plus and it's
actually going to be a minus because when you take the
derivative of this with respect to t it's going
to be minus sine of t. So it's going to be negative
and then let me leave some space for this term right here. Negative sine of t. And you're going to have
this constant out there. That's a constant in t. b plus a cosine of s. That's just that
term right there. Derivative of cosine t is
negative sine of t times j. And then the partial of this
with respect to t this is just a constant in t. So the partial's going to be 0. So I'll write plus 0k. Let me do all my vectors
in that same color. Plus 0 times the unit vector k. So that gives us our
partial derivatives. Now we have to take their cross
product, then find the magnitude of the cross product,
and then evaluate this double integral. And I'll do that in the
next couple of videos. 

Transcript for: Example of calculating a surface integral part 2 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Where we left off in the last
video, we were finding the surface area of a torus,
or a doughnut shape. And we were doing it by
taking a surface integral. And in order to take a surface
integral, we had to find the partial of our parameterization
with respect to s, and the partial with respect to t, and
now we're ready to take the cross product. And then we can take the
magnitude of the cross product. And then we can actually take
this double integral and figure out the surface area. So let's just do
it step by step. Here we could take the cross
product, which is not a non-hairy operation. This is why you don't see many
surface integrals actually get done, or many examples done. Let's take the cross product
of these two fellows. So the partial of r with
respect to s, crossed with in magenta the partial
of r with respect to t. This will be a little
bit of review of cross products for you. You might remember this
is going to be equal to the determinant. I'm going to write the
unit vectors up here. The first row is i, j, and k. And then the next 2 rows are
going to be let me do that in that yellow color the next 2
rows are going to be the components of these guys. So let me copy and paste them. You have that right there. Copy and paste. Put that guy right there. Then you have this
fellow right there. Copy and paste. Put him right there. And then you got this
guy right here. This'll save us some time. Copy and paste. Put him right there. Then the last row is going to
be this guy's components. Copy and paste. Put him right here. Almost done. This guy copy and paste. Put him right there. Make sure we know that
these are separate terms. And finally, we don't have to
copy and paste it, but just since we did for all of the
other terms, I'll do it for that 0, as well. So the cross product of these
is literally the determinant of this matrix right here. And so, just as a bit of
a refresher of taking determinants, this is going to
be i times the subdeterminant right here, if you cross out
this column and that row. So it's going to be equal to
i you're not used to seeing the unit vector written first,
but we can switch the order later times i times the
submatrix right here. If you cross out this
column and that row. So it's going to be this term
times 0 which is just 0 minus this term
times that term. So minus this term times this
term- the negative signs are going to cancel out, so
this'll be positive. So it's just going to be i
times this term times this term, without a negative
sign right there. So i times this term,
which is a cosine of s. It's really that term times
that term, minus that term times that term, but the
negatives cancel out. That times that is 0. So that's how we can do this. It's a cosine of s times b plus
a cosine of s I'll just all switch to the same
color sine of t. So we've got our i term
for the cross product. Now it's going to be minus j
remember when you take the determinant, you actually have
this, kind of, you have to checker board of
switching sines. So now it's going to be minus j
times and you cross out that row and that column and it's
going to be this term times this term which is just
0 minus this term times this term. And once again, when
you have oh, sorry. When you cross out this
column and that row. So it's going to be that
guy times that guy, minus this guy times this guy. So it's going to be minus this
guy times this guy so it's going to be let me
do it in yellow. So the negative times negative
that guy, b plus a cosine of s cosine of t times this
guy, a cosine of s. We'll clean it up
in a little bit. Well, we'll clean this up, and
you see this negative and that negative will cancel out. We're just multiplying
everything. And then finally, the k term. So plus I'll go to the next
line plus k times cross out that row, that column it's
going to be that times that, minus that times that. So that looks like a kind
of a beastly thing. But I think if we take
it step by step, it shouldn't be too bad. So that times that. The negatives are
going to cancel out. So this term right here
is going to be a sine of t, sine of s. And then this term
right here is b plus a cosine of s sine of t. So that's that times that and
the negatives canceled out, that's why I didn't put any
negatives here minus this times this. So this times this is going
to be a negative number. But if you take the negative
of it, it's going to be a positive value. So it's going to be plus
that a cosine of t sine of s times that. Times b plus a cosine
of s cosine of t. Now you see why you don't see
many examples of surface integrals being done. Let's see if we can clean this
up a little bit, especially if we can clean up this
last term a bit. So let's see what we
can do to simplify it. So our first term. So let's just multiply
it out, I guess is the easiest way to do it. Actually, the easiest first
step would just be factor out the b plus a cosine of s. Because that's in every
term. b plus a cosine of s. b plus a cosine of s. b plus a cosine of s.
b plus a cosine of s. So let's just factor that out. So this whole crazy thing can
be written as b plus a cosine of s so we factored
it out times. I'll put in some brackets
here, so you don't multiply times every component. So the i component, when you
factor this guy out, is going to be a cosine of s sine of t. Let me write it in green. So it's going to be a cosine of
s sine of t times i you're not used to seeing the i
before, so I'm going to write the i here and then plus. We're factoring this guy out,
so you're just going to be left with cosine of
t, a cosine of s. Or we can write it as a cosine
of s cosine of t that's that right there, just putting it in
the same order as that times the unit vector j. And then when we factored this
guy out so we're not going to see that or that anymore. When you factor that out,
we can multiply this out, and what do we get? So in green, I'll write again. So if you multiply sine of t
times this thing over here because that's all that we have
left after we factor out this thing we get a sine of s,
sine squared of t, right? We have sine of t
times sine of t. So that's that over there. Plus what do we
have over here? We have a sine of s times
cosine squared of t. And all of that times
the k unit vector. And so things are looking a
little bit more simplified, but you might see
something jump out at you. You have a sine squared
and a cosine squared. So somehow, if I can just make
that just sine squared plus cosine squared of t, those
will simplify to 1. And we can. And this term right here, we
can if we just focus on that term and this is all kind
of algebraic manipulation. If we just focus on that term,
this term right here can be rewritten as a sine of s if
we factor that out times sine squared of t plus cosine
squared of t times our unit vector, k. Right? I just factored out an a sine
of s from both of these terms. And this is our most
fundamental trig identity from the unit circle. This is equal to 1. So this last term simplifies
to a sine of s times k. So, so far we've
gotten pretty far. We were able to figure out the
cross product of these 2, I guess, partial derivatives of
the vector valued, or our original
parameterization there. We were able to figure out what
this thing right here, before we take the magnitude of it, it
translates to this thing right here. Let me rewrite it well, I
don't need to rewrite it. You know it. Well, I'll rewrite it. So that's equal to I'll
rewrite it neatly and we'll use this in the next video b plus
a cosine of s times open bracket a cosine of s sine of t
times i plus switch back to the blue plus a cosine of s
cosine of t times j plus switch back to the blue this
thing plus this simplified nicely a sine of s times k. Times the unit vector k. This right here is this
expression right there. And I'll finish this
video, since I'm already over 10 minutes. And in the next video,
we're going to take the magnitude of it. And then, if we have
time, actually take this double integral. And we'll all be done. We'll figure out the surface
area of this torus. 

Transcript for: Example of calculating a surface integral part 3 | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
In the last couple of videos
we've been slowly moving towards our goal of figuring
out the surface area of this torus. And we did it by evaluating a
surface integral, and in order to evaluate a surface integral
we had to take the parameterization take its
partial with respect to s and with respect to t. We did that in the first video. Then we had to take
its cross product. We did that in the
second video. Now, we're ready to take the
magnitude of the cross product. And then we can evaluate it
inside of a double integral and we will have solved or we would
have computed an actual surface integral something you see
very few times in your education career. So this is kind of exciting. So this was the cross
product right here. Now, let's take the
magnitude of this thing. And you might remember, the
magnitude of any vector is kind of a Pythagorean theorem. And in this case it's going
to be kind of the distance formula to the Pythagorean
theorem n 3 dimensions. So the magnitude this is
equal to, just as a reminder, is equal to this right here. It's equal to the partial of
r with respect to s cross with the partial of
r with respect to t. Let me copy it and paste it. That is equal to
that right there. Put an equal sign. These two quantities are equal. Now we want to figure
out the magnitude. So if we want to take the
magnitude of this thing, that's going to be equal to well,
this is just a scalar that's multiply everything. So let's just write
the scalar out there. So b plus a cosine of s
times the magnitude of this thing right here. And the magnitude of this thing
right here is going to be the sum, of you can imagine,
it's the square root of this thing dotted with itself. Or you could say it's the sum
of the squares of each of these terms to the 1/2 power. So let me write it like that. Let me write the sum
of the squares. So if you square this you get
a squared cosine squared of s, sine squared of t. That's that term. Plus let me color code it. That's that term. I'll do the magenta. Plus that term squared. Plus a squared cosine squared
of s, cosine squared of t. That's that term. And then finally I'll
do another color this term squared. So plus a squared
sine squared of s. And it's going to be all of
this business to the 1/2 power. This right here is the same
thing as the magnitude of this right here. This is just a scalar
that's multiplying by both of these terms. So let's see if we can do
anything interesting here. If this can be
simplified in any way. We have a squared
cosine squared of s. We have an a squared cosine
squared of s here, so let's factor that out from both
of these terms and see what happens. I'm just going to rewrite
this second part. So this is going to be a
squared cosine squared of s times sine squared of t put
a parentheses plus cosine oh, I want to do it in that
magenta color, not orange. Plus cosine squared of t. And then you're going to
have this plus a squared sine squared of s. And of course, all of that
is to the 1/2 power. Now what is this? Well, we have sine squared of
t plus cosine squared of t. That's nice. That's equal to 1, the most
basic of trig identities. So this expression right here
simplifies to a squared cosine squared of s plus this
over here: a squared sine squared of s. And all of that to
the 1/2 power. You might immediately
recognize you can factor out an a squared. This is equal to a squared
times cosine squared of s plus sine squared of s. And all of that to
the 1/2 power. I'm just focusing on
this term right here. I'll write this in a second. But once again, cosine squared
plus sine squared of anything is going to be equal 1 as long
as it's the same anything it's equal to 1. So this term is a squared
to the 1/2 power. Or the square root of a
squared, which is just going to be equal to a. So all of this all that crazy
business right here just simplifies, all of that
just simplifies to a. So this cross product here
simplifies to this times a, which is a pretty neat
and clean simplification. So let me rewrite this. That simplifies, it
simplifies to a times that. And what's that? a
times b, so it's ab. ab plus a squared cosine of s. So already, we've gotten pretty
far and it's nice when you do something so beastly and
eventually it gets to something reasonably simple. And just to review what we had
to do, what our mission was several videos ago, is we want
to evaluate what this thing is over the region from s over
the region over with the surface is defined. So s going from 0 to 2 pi
and t going from 0 to 2 pi. Over this region. So we want to integrate
this over that region. So that region we're going
to vary s from 0 to 2 pi. So ds. And then we're going to vary
t from 0 to 2 pi dt. And this is what
we're evaluating. We're evaluating the magnitude
of the cross product of these two partial derivatives of our
original parameterization. So this is what we
can put in there. Things are getting simple all
of a sudden, or simpler. ab plus a squared cosine of s. And what is this equal to? So this is going to be equal
to well, we just take antiderivative of the
inside with respect to s. So the antiderivative
so let me do the outside of our integral. So we're still going to have
to deal with the 0 to 2 pi and our dt right here. But the antiderivative with
respect to s right here is going to be ab is just a
constant, so it's going to be abs plus what's the
antiderivative of cosine of s? It's sine of s. So plus a squared sine of s. And we're going to evaluate
it from 0 to 2 pi. And what is this going
to be equal to? Let's put our boundaries out
again or the t integral that we're going to have to do in
a second 0 the 2 pi d t. When you put 2 pi here you're
going to get ab times 2 pi or 2 pi ab. So you're going to have 2 pi ab
plus a squared sine of 2 pi. Sine of 2 pi is 0, so there's
not going to be any term there. And then minus 0 times
ab, which is 0. And then you're going to
have minus a squared sine of 0, which is also 0. So all of the other
terms are all 0's. So that's what we're left with
it, it simplified nicely. So now we just have to take
the antiderivative of this with respect to t. And this is a constant in t, so
this is going to be equal to take the antiderivative with
respect to t 2 pi abt and we need to evaluate that from 0 to
2 pi, which is equal to so we put 2 pi in there. You have a 2 pi for t, it'll
be a 2 pi times 2 pi ab. Or we should say, 2 pi
squared times ab minus 0 times this thing. Well, that's just going to
be 0, so we don't even have to write it down. So we're done. This is the surface
area of the torus. This is exciting. It just kind of snuck up on us. This is equal to 4 pi squared
ab, which is kind of a neat formula because it's
very neat and clean. You know, it has a 2 pi,
which is kind of the diameter of a circle. We're squaring it, which kind
of makes sense because we're taking the product of you can
kind of imagine the product of these 2 circles. I'm speaking in very abstract,
general terms, but that kind of feels good. And then we're taking just
the product of those two radiuses, remember. Let me just copy this
thing down here. Actually, let me copy this
thing because this is our new this is our exciting result. Let me copy this. So copy. So all of this work that we
did simplified to this, which is exciting. We now know that if you have a
torus where the radius of the cross section is a, and the
radius from the center of the torus to the middle of
the cross sections is b. That the surface area of that
torus is going to be 4 pi squared times a times b. Which I think is a
pretty neat outcome. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #1a | AP Calculus AB solved exams | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Problem 1. For 0 is less than or equal to
t is less than or equal to 6, a particle is moving
along the x-axis. The particle's position x of
t is not explicitly given. The velocity of the
particle is given by v of t is equal to all of this
business right over here. The acceleration of the
particle is given by a of t is equal to all of this
business over here. They actually didn't
have to give us that because the
acceleration is just the derivative of the velocity. And they also gave us they
don't tell us the position function, but they tell us
where we start off, x of 0 is equal to 2. Fair enough. Now let's do part
A. Is the speed of the particle increasing
or decreasing at time t equals 5.5? Give a reason for your answer. It looks like they did
something a little sneaky here because they gave us
a velocity function and then they ask about a speed. And you might say, wait,
aren't those the same thing? And I would say, no, they
aren't quite the same thing. Velocity is a magnitude
and a direction. It is a vector quantity. Speed is just a magnitude. It is a scalar quantity. And to see the difference,
you could have a velocity and this isn't maybe
particular to this problem because they don't
give us the units but you could have a velocity
of negative 5 meters per second. And maybe if we're talking
about on the x-axis, this would mean
we're moving leftward at 5 meters per
second on the x-axis. So the magnitude is
5 meters per second. This is the magnitude. And the direction is specified
by the negative number. And that is the direction. Your velocity could be
negative 5 meters per second, but your speed would just
be 5 meters per second. So your speed is 5
meters per second whether you're going to
the left or to the right. Your velocity, you actually
care whether you're going to the left or the right. So let's just keep
that in mind while we try to solve this problem. So the best way to figure out
whether our rate of change is increasing or decreasing is
to look at the acceleration. Because acceleration
is really just the rate of change of velocity. And then, we can
think a little bit about this velocity
versus speed question. So what is the
acceleration at time 5.5? Get the calculator out. We can use calculators for
this part of the AP exam. And I assume they intend us to
because this isn't something that's easy to
calculate by hand. So the acceleration at time 5.5,
we just have to say t is 5.5 and evaluate this function. So 1/2 I'll just write
0.5 times e to the t over 4. Well t is 5.5. 5.5 divided by 4. And then, times cosine of 5.5
divided by 4 gives us 0.38. Did I do that right? We have 0.5 times e to
the 5.5 divided by 4, times cosine oh, sorry. I made a mistake. That looked a little strange. It's not cosine of
5.5 divided by 4, it's cosine of e to
the 5.5 divided by 4. So let's look at that. So that's one
parentheses I close. And now that is the second
parentheses that I've closed. And I get negative 1.3 well, I
just say roughly negative 1.36. So this is equal to,
or approximately equal to, negative 1.36 if I round it. And we don't care about so
much as the actual value. What we really care
about is its sign. So the acceleration at
time 5.5 is negative, which tells us that the
velocity is decreasing. Now, you might be tempted
to say, we're done. But remember, they're
not asking us, is the velocity of the particle
increasing or decreasing? They're asking us, is
the speed of the particle increasing or decreasing? And if you're saying,
hey, how did I know that, just remember
acceleration is just the rate of change of velocity. If acceleration
is negative, that means the rate of
change of velocity is negative It is going down. But anyway, how do we
address this speed issue? How do we think about it? Well, there's two scenarios. If our velocity is
positive at time 5.5, so if we have a
positive velocity, so let's say our velocity
is 5 meters per second although they don't
give us units here, so I won't use units. So let's say our velocity is 5. And then it's negative. So at some point our velocity is
going to be something smaller. Then that means that the speed
would also be decreasing. So if we have a
positive velocity, then the fact that
acceleration is negative means that both velocity and
speed would be decreasing. On the other hand, if we had
a negative velocity at time t equals 5.5, then the
fact that it's decreasing means that we're getting
even more negative. And if we're getting
even more negative, then that means the
speed is increasing. The magnitude is increasing
in the leftward direction. So what we really need to
do, beyond just evaluating the acceleration at
time 5.5, we also have to evaluate
the velocity to see if it's going in the left
or the rightward direction. So let's evaluate the velocity. The velocity at 5.5 and we'll
just get our calculator out again. Velocity at 5.5 this is
our velocity function is going to be equal
to 2 times the sine of let me write it this way. Just because I want to make
sure I get my parentheses right. 2 times the sine let me
write it this way 2 sine of e to the 5.5, that's our
time, divided by 4. So I did that part
right over here. And I'm going to
close the 2 as well. And then plus 1. So this is our velocity. So our velocity at
time 5.5 is negative. So negative 0.45. Negative 0.45 roughly. So this is negative. The velocity is negative. So we have this scenario where
the velocity is negative, which means we're going
in the left direction. And the fact that the
velocity is also decreasing means that over time at
least at this point in time as we go forward in time, it'll
become even more negative. And it'll become
even more negative if we wait a little bit longer. So that means that the magnitude
of the velocity is increasing. It's just going in the
leftward direction. So if the magnitude
of the velocity is increasing
although it's going in the leftward
direction, that means that the speed is increasing. So the velocity
so this is one of those interesting scenarios
the velocity is decreasing. But the speed, which is
what they're asking us in the question,
speed is increasing. And if you wanted to do
it really quick with all of this explanation I gave
you, you would say, hey, look. What's acceleration? Is it positive or negative? You would evaluate it. You'd say, hey, it's negative. So you know velocity
is decreasing. And then you would say,
hey, what is velocity? Is it positive or negative? You evaluate it. You say it's negative. So you have a negative
value that is decreasing. So it's becoming more negative. So that means its
magnitude is increasing, or speed is increasing. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB Free Response #1 parts b c d | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Now let's do Part b). Find the average velocity of the particle for the time period between time 0 and time 6. So the easy way to think about this, average velocity, is that your average, or one way to think about it, the distance that you travel, sometimes I use "d" for distance or "s" for displacement But your distance in general is equal to your average velocity times time. Or, your average velocity is equal to the distance you travel, divided by time. And so how do we figure out the distance that we travel over that period? Especially because they didn't explicitly give us the position function. Well if you think about it, Let's think about the velocity function over here which they did give us,"v(t)" and I don't know exactly what it looks like, let me just draw a general velocity function right over here So this is our t-axis, and this is our velocity axis right over here and we care about between time 0 and time 6, and let's say our function does something like this, it doesn't really matter, this is just a general drawing over here, How do we figure out the total distance over that time? Well, if you take any small time, right over here,and you multiply it times roughly the constant velocity over that time period, then that will tell you the area of this little column, which will tell you approximately, the distance traveled over this very small interval of time. Because you have time times an approximately constant velocity, which will give you a distance. And so in general if you take the area under this curve, from 0 to 6, that will give you the total distance travelled. So "d" is equal to the definite integral from 0 to 6 of "v(t)" of this thing right over here, "v(t)dt" So if you want the average velocity, you just find the distance, which is this definite integral, and then you divide that by the time, or the elapsed time, in this case, I could actually write times delta t right over here, our change in time right over here, is going to be 6 we start at 0 and we finish at 6, so we just have to evaluate this definite integral, which is not that easy to evaluate analytically, it's lucky for us that they do allow us to use calculators in this part so we'll evaluate it using a calculator And then we just have to divide it by 6 So let's first find out teh distance travelled between time 0 and time 6. And to do that, we can use the TI-85 We'll go to catalog, this tells us all of the different functions they have. And to evaluate definite integrals, we use the 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #2 (a & b) | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
As a pot of tea cools, the temperature the tea is modeled by a differentiable
function h. For 0 is less than or equal to, t is less
than or equal to 10. Where time t is measured in minutes. And temperature h of t is measured in
degrees Celsius. Values of h of t, at selected time,
selected values of time t are shown in the table above, so that's
right over there. Use the data in the table to approximate
the rate at which the temperature of the t is changing at
time t equals 3.5. Show the computations that lead to your
answer. So, they give us a bunch of points, so
let's just graph this, just so we can visualize what this data's
telling us a little bit. And, I suspect that this might be useful, so, this, right over here, is our
temperature axis. This is our temperature at any moment, in
degrees Celsius. And then, this is our time axis, and they
gave us the time of 0 2 5 9 and 10. They give us a temperature of those times. So, this is 0. 2, 5's A little bit further. 5, 9, And then 10. And at time zero, the temperature's 66
degrees, Celsius. 66, So it's right over there. At time 2, it is 60 degrees Celsius. At time two, it is 60 degrees celsius. At time 5, it is 52 degrees Celsius. So time 5, maybe it's right over here,
this is 52 degrees Celsius. At time 9, or after 9 minutes, I should
say, it's at 44 degrees Celsius. So this 44 degrees Celsius, and after 10
minutes it's 43 degrees Celsius. So this is really just a graph showing how
it cools off over those ten minutes, over
those ten minutes. That's what the data is telling us. It's kind of a curve like this, and we've
sampled it at these points. So going back to Part A. Use the data in the table to approximate
the rate at which the temperature of the tea is changing at
time t equals 3.5. So the rate of change is really just a
slope of this curve at time t is equal to 3.5. So really, we just wanna find the slope at
that point right over there. We wanna find the slope, and we don't know
the actual function. So the best way to approximate the slope
at that point, is really just find the slope, between, time,
between minute five, and minute two. So the rate of change, so we could say, we
could say that the rate, the rate, is going to be approximately, our
change in temperature over that, over those three
minutes. So, h of 5 minus h of 2, and this is
obviously going to be in degrees Celsius, over the number
of minutes that changed, so we went from 5 minutes or from, we end at 5
minutes, and we started at 2 minutes, and so the rate, the rate is
going to be approximately. At five minutes, our temperature is 52
degrees, 52 degrees. At two minutes, our temperature is 60
degrees, 60 degrees. And then, this is over change in three
minutes. 5 Minus 2 is 3. So, this gets us, let me just pull to the
right a little bit,. This gives us negative 8. Negative 8 degrees Celsius over three
minutes. Or the rate at, the rate at, at three and
a half minutes is going to be approximately negative 8 3rds, degrees Celsius per
minute. So that is part a, part a. And then part b, using correct units,
explain the meaning of 1 over 10, 1 over 10, times the definite integral from 0 to 10 of h of
t dt in the context of this problem. Use a trapezoidal sum with the 4
sub-intervals indicated by the table to estimate this
thing. So, the integral from 0 to 10 of h of t is really the area of this entire, under this
curve, right over here. That's the integral, that's this part
right over here. And then, we're going to divide that. We're going to divide that by. We're going to divide that by 10. So, what this is really giving us. This is. This expression, right over here. Is the average, this is the average temperature. This is the average temperature over that
time period. The integral of the temperature function
divided by the total amount of time that has, that has
elapsed. And then, in using correct units, well
it's the average temperature and the average temperature is once again
going to be in degrees. Degrees Celsius. And it makes sense, cuz this right over
here is in degrees Celsius. You're multiplying it by time right over
here, but then you could divide by. You're dividing, I'm assuming, by time
right over here as, so this is times minutes, divided by
minutes. So then you just get degrees Celsius
again. So this is, this expression right over
here is just the average temperature over those
ten minutes. They they say use a trapezoidal sum with
the four sub intervals indicated by the table
to estimate this. So, a trapezoidal sum is, we don't know
the exact function here, so we won't be able
to analytically evaluate this definite
integral, but what we can do is divide, is divide this area into
four sections. They tell us to use this, four
subintervals. And, we'll essentially divide it into four
trapezoids. So, this is one trapezoid right over here. So this is one trapezoid right over there. That's my first trapezoid from zero to two
on the base. And you see on the left end of that trapezoid is height of 66 the right end is
60. And the the next trapezoid will go from
two to five. Let me do that in a more. Color that contrast a little bit better. The next trapezoid will go from 2 to 5. The next trapezoid goes from 2 to 5. And then the third trapezoid goes from, goes from 5 to 9. The third trapezoid goes from 5 to 9. And then, the fourth trapezoid goes from 9
to 10. Goes from 9 to 10. And so if I want to. If I want to approximate the definite
integral part right here, before we divide by 10, I just need to find the area
of these four trapezoids. So, let's do that. The area of this first trapezoid is going
to be the base, which is 2 times the average
height. The height if the left side for this
trapped is 66. The height on the right side of this
trapezoid is 60. The average height right over here is
going to be 63, just the average of 60 and 66. So, this area right over here is, this is
126, that's the area of the green part right
over there. By the same logic, the area of this orange
part. I want to do that in the orange color. The area of this orange part, the base
right over here is 3. Base is 3. And then the average height. The height over here is 60. The height over here is 52. This is, they're seated 8 apart, so the
average is going to be 4 away from each is going to be 56. So this is, the area here is going to be 3
times, 3 times 56. Which is 150 plus 18. 150 Plus 18 is 168. That's the area of this orange trapezoid,
and then the area of this blue trapezoid. The base right over here is 4, and then then average height, the height here is
52, the height here is 44, the average of 52 and 44, let see they're 10, they are, sorry, they are
8 apart. So then it's just gonna be 4 from each of
these so it's 48, so the average height here is 48, and so 4
times 48 is 160 plus 32. So it's 192, and then finally this last
trapezoid, it's base is only 1. Its base right over here is only 1, and
then its height is 43 at the left side, 43 at the
right side. So its average height is 43.5, 43.5. So it's 43.5 times 1. So that's just going to be 43.5, and so if
we add up the areas under, or the areas of all these trapezoids, we have a pretty good approximation for the
definite integral. I'll just use, do the. Use the calculator for this part right
over here. So we have 126, plus 168, plus 192, plus
43.5, 43.5. Gives us 529.5. So this is equal to 529.5. And so that's our approximation for the definite integral
part. But then we also have to divide it by 10,
or we have to multiply time 1 10th. So we've evaluated, so this part right over here, we got 529.5 as our
approximation. It's not going to be exact, but using the,
using the trapezoidal sum, the sum of the areas
of these trapezoids. And now we have to multiply by 1 10th, so
lets do that. So, or we could just divide by 10, which actually we don't need a calculator for
that, 52.95. So this whole thing, this whole thing
evaluates to 52.95, and I'll do the next two parts in the next
video. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #2 (c & d) | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
We're now on part c. "Evaluate
the definite integral from 0 to 10 of
H prime of (t)dt. Using correct units,
explain the meaning of the expression in the
context of this problem." So we know that if we
just want to evaluate this definite integral from
0 to 10 of H prime of (t)dt, this is just the same thing as
evaluating the anti-derivative of this thing right over here,
which is just H of t at 10. And subtract from that the
anti-derivative of this evaluated at 0. This is the second fundamental
theorem of calculus. This is exactly how we
evaluate definite integrals. And when you look
at it from this, you just see that
when you evaluate it, it just gives us the
difference in temperature from 0 minutes to 10 minutes. We're taking the
temperature at 10 minutes and from that we're subtracting
from that the temperature at 0 minutes. So this is really our
change in temperature over those 10 minutes. And we can actually evaluate it. We know what our temperature
was after 10 minutes. H of 10 is 43 degrees Celsius. So this is 43 right over here. And from that, we're
going to subtract our initial temperature,
our temperature at 0 minutes, which
is 66 degrees Celsius. We're going to subtract
66 degrees Celsius. This gives us negative
23 degrees Celsius. So our change in temperature
is negative 23 degrees. Or our temperature has gone
down 23 degrees Celsius over the course of
the first 10 minutes. So that is part c
right over there. Now, let's do part d. "At time t equals 0, biscuits
with temperature 100 degrees were removed from an oven." So now we're talking
about biscuits. We started with
tea, now biscuits. "The temperature of
the biscuits at time t is modeled by a
differentiable function B, for which it is
known that B prime of t" is equal to this
business right over here. "Using the given
models at time t equals 10, how much cooler are
the biscuits than the tea?" Well, we know what the
temperature of the tea is. So we just have to figure out
the temperature of the biscuits to figure out how much
cooler they are than the tea. And to figure out the
temperature of the biscuits, we can essentially just
use the exact same idea. We can say, we know that
the biscuits started off at 100 degrees Celsius. And we could say, well, how
much did they cool down? Or what was their
change in temperature over the 10 minutes? If we know the change
in temperature, and we know it started
at 100 degrees, then we can use that
information to get what its temperature
is at 10 minutes. And then we can
answer their question. So the change in temperature
over those 10 minutes is just the definite
integral from 0 to 10 of this business
right over here. Let me just write it. So you see it's the
exact same pattern as what we saw over here. This was for the cookies. Now we're talking
about the biscuits. And this right
over here is going to be the definite
integral from 0 to 10. B prime of t they give
it to us right over here is negative 13.84e to
the negative 0.173t, dt. And now we just evaluate this. Well, we can evaluate this. What we'd have to
is because we know the derivative of e
to the a x is a e to the x. Let me write that. The derivative of e to the
ax is equal to ae to the ax, just from the chain rule. Derivative of the
inside is just a. And then we multiply
that times the derivative of the entire thing. And derivative of e to
the x is just e to the x. Or we could say that the
integral of e to the ax dx is equal to 1 over a
e to the ax plus c. And you could take
the derivative of this to see that you would
get this right over here. So using that same idea,
the anti-derivative of this over here is just
going to be the negative 13.84. And we're going to divide
by this coefficient on the t right over here. So negative 0.173. And you could use
your calculator. Calculators are allowed for
this part of the problem. But we could do
this analytically. Times e to the
negative 0.173 times t. We're going to evaluate
that from 0 to 10. So we're going to
evaluate it at 10 and subtract from that
this thing evaluated at 0. Let me just factor out
this part right over here. So it's going to be negative
13.84 over negative 0.173 times this evaluated
at when t is 10. So e to the if we
multiply this times 10 this is negative 1.73. That's when I
evaluated it at 10. And from that we
want to subtract when this is evaluated at 0. If the exponent here is 0, if t
is 0, the whole exponent is 0. So e to the 0 power
is just equal to 1. And now we can get
our calculator out to evaluate this. So I'll get my TI-85 out. I'm just going to evaluate this
inner expression right over here. So e to the negative 1.73. And from that I
want to subtract 1. So that gives me negative 0.822. So that's this part
in parentheses. And then I want to multiply it
times what I have out front. So my previous
answer times and I won't write the negatives just
because the negative divided by negative is going
to be a positive. So it's just 13.84
divided by 0.173. And I didn't write
the negatives, because they just cancel out. And that gives me
negative 65.817. So this is our change in
temperature for the biscuits. It's our change in temperature. Let me write it down. Negative 65.82 degrees. So this is negative
65.82 degrees Celsius. This is our change in
temp for the biscuits. Now we know that they
started off at 100 degrees, and they went down by 65.82
degrees over the 10 minutes. They started at
100, and then they went down by this
previous amount. So, whoops. I want to subtract the answer. So minus the answer. Oh, sorry. I want to actually add
the change in temperature. I want to be very careful here. It went down by 65 degrees. So I really should just
say 100 minus 65.817. I could keep adding
digits if I want. 247, that's enough. So after 10 minutes the
biscuits are 34.18 degrees. And we already knew what
the temperature of the tea is after 10 minutes. We already knew
it was 43 degrees. So the biscuits
are at 34 degrees. The tea is at 43 degrees. So if we do 43 is
where the tea is, then we subtract the temperature
of the biscuits, we see that the biscuits
are 8.82 degrees cooler. 8.82 degrees Celsius cooler. So we could say the biscuits
are 8.82 degrees Celsius cooler than the tea. And we're done with
part d as well. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #3 (a & b) | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Let R be the region in the
first quadrant enclosed by the graphs of f
of x is equal to 8x to the third and g of x
is equal to sine of pi x, as shown in the figure above. And they drew the
figure right over here. Part a, write the equation
for the line tangent to the graph of f at
x is equal to 1/2. So let me just
redraw it here just so that I like drawing on
the black background, I guess, is the main reason
why I'm redrawing it. So the function f of x is
equal to 8x to the third, looks like this. It looks like that. This is our f of x-axis,
and this is our x-axis. And we want the equation
for the line tangent at x is equal to 1/2. So this is x is equal to 1/2. If you go up here, if
you evaluate f of 1/2, you get 8 times
1/2 to the third, which is 8 times
1/8, which is 1. And they actually gave us
that already on this point. This is the point 1/2 comma 1. And we need to find the
equation for the tangent line. So the tangent line will
look something like that. And to figure out
this equation, we just need to figure out
its slope, and then we know a point that it's on
and you could use point-slope or you could just use your kind
of standard slope-intercept form to give an
equation for that line. So the first part, let's
figure out its slope. And the slope of
the tangent line is going to be the
same slope as the slope of our function at that point. Or another way to
think about it, it is going to be
f prime of 1/2, or the derivative
evaluated at 1/2. The derivative
gives us the slope of that line at any point. So what is f prime
of x? f prime of x is just the derivative of this. So 3 times 8 is 24
times x squared. 24 x squared. f prime of 1/2 is equal
to 24 times 1/2 squared, which is equal to 24 times
1/4, which is equal to 6. So the slope of this
line is equal to 6. I'll use m for slope. That's the convention
that we used when we first learned
it in algebra. So the slope is going to be 6. So the general
equation for this line is y is equal to mx plus b. This is the slope. This is the y-intercept. We already know
that the slope is 6, and then we can use the
fact that the line goes through the point 1/2, 1
to figure out what b is. So when y is 1, 1 is equal to
our slope times x. x is 1/2. Or another way to say
it, when x is 1/2, y is 1 plus some y-intercept. Or if I take x is
1/2, I multiply it times the slope plus the
y-intercept, I should get 1. And so I get 1 is
equal to 3 plus b. I can subtract 3 from both
sides, and I get negative 2 is equal to b. So the equation of the
line is going to be y is equal to 6x minus 2. That is the equation
of the tangent line. Now part b, find
the area of R. So R is this region right over here. It's bounded above
by g of x, which they've defined as sine of pi x. It's bounded below by f
of x, or 8x to the third. So the area is going
to be actually, let me just do it I'll
scroll down a little bit. I still want to be able to see
this graph right over here. Part b. The area of R is going to be
equal to the integral from 0, that's this point of
intersection right over here, to 1/2. So let me make it clear. This is 0 to 1/2. And then the
function on the top so we could just take
the area of that, but then we're going to
have to subtract from that the area underneath
the function below. Or one way to think about
it is the integral from 0 to 1/2 of the top function is
g of x, which is sine of pi x. But if we just evaluated
this integral let me just put a dx over here. If we just evaluated
this, we would get the area of
this entire region. But what we need to
do is subtract out the area underneath the
second, underneath f of x. We just subtract out
the area under that. So we just subtract
from that f of x. And f of x, we already
saw, is 8x to the third. Is 8x to the third power. And now we can
just evaluate this. So let me draw a
little line here. It's getting a little bit messy. I'll just do it down here. So we need to take the
antiderivative of sine of pi x. Well, the derivative of cosine
of x is negative sine x. The derivative of cosine of pi
x is negative pi cosine of pi x. So the antiderivative
of sine of pi x is going to be negative
1 over pi cosine of pi x. And you can verify
it for yourself. And you might say, wait. Sal, how did you know
it was a negative. Well, I put the
negative there so that when I take the derivative
of the cosine of pi x, I would get a negative sign, but
that negative will cancel out the negative to give
me a positive here. And you say, why do you
put a 1 over pi here. Well, when you take the
derivative of this thing using the chain rule, you take
the derivative of the pi x, you'll get pi, that you
would multiply everything by, and then you would get
negative sine of pi x. And that pi doesn't
show up here. So I need something for
it to cancel out with. And that's what this 1 over pi
is going to cancel out with. And you could do use
substitution and all the rest, if you found something
like that useful. But it's in general,
a good habit or I guess it's good to be able
to do this almost by sight. So, and you can verify
that this derivative is equal to sine of pi x. So the antiderivative
of sine of pi x is this. The antiderivative of
negative 8x to the third power is negative 8 I'm going to
divide it by 4 so negative 2x to the fourth power. And all I did is I
incremented the 3 to a 4, and then I divided
by 8 by the 4. And you could take
the derivative of this to verify this it is the
same thing as negative 8x to the third power. And we're going to have to
evaluate that from 0 to 1/2. When you evaluated 1/2,
I'm going to get negative 1 over pi cosine of pi
over 2 minus 2 times 1/2 to the fourth power is 1/16. So that's evaluated at 1/2. And then from that, I'm
going to subtract negative 1 over pi cosine of 0. Let me just write it out. So minus negative 1 over
pi cosine of pi times 0. Let me just write
cosine of 0 pi, I could write, or pi times 0,
minus 2 times 0 to the fourth. So that's just
going to be minus 0. So let's evaluate this. So to simplify it, we have
a cosine of pi over 2. Cosine of pi over 2
is just going to be 0, so this whole thing
just becomes zero. And then you have a
negative 2 divided by 16. That's negative 1/8. And then from that, I'm going
to subtract this business here. Cosine of 0, this is 1. So this is just a
negative 1 over pi. And then I have a 0 there. so I can ignore that. So this is equal to negative
1 over 8 plus 1 over pi. And we are done. This part of it, you're not
allowed to use a calculator. So this is about
as far as I would expect them to
expect you to get. And so I'll leave you there. In the next video,
we will do part c. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #3 (c) | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part C, write but do not evaluate an integral expression for the volume of the solid generated when R - - so that's this region right over here - when R is rotated about the horizontal line y=1. So y=1 is right over there. So, the way I like to think about it - let's think about the volume if I were to just take the bottom function - if I were to just take f(x) - if I were to just take f(x) - and if I were to rotate that function around y=x - if I were to rotate this thing around - sorry, around y=1 - what would the volume of that be, and then I'm going to subtract from that the volume if I were to take the top function - if I were to take g(x) and rotate it around. So let's first of all think about what volume I would get - and this is really the disk method, and I go into it in much more detail earlier in the calculus playlist, but let's think about the volume if f(x) is rotated around that axis. And to do that, let's imagine each of - each sliver of that volume. So this is - let me draw a little thing right over here - and you could imagine once this little silver is rotated it forms the bo- it forms the or you should - you could imagine - you could imagine - this length is the radius of a disk. And so - and just to imagine that let me draw the entire disk. So if this is rotated around - if this is rotated around it will become a disk - it will become a disk - it will become a disk that looks something like that, and I'll just call the depth of the disk - so the disk if you imagine it a coin this is kind of the side of the coin, the depth of the coin - the depth of the coin right over there. I know I can draw that better than that. So the depth of the coin is just like that. It's a fixed depth, and I'm going to call that dx - so it's just this distance right over here it is the dx - and what is going to be the area of that coin? Well the area of the surface of this is coin - so let me - let me do it like this... in a different color. So I want to do it in blue - the area of this coin is just pi times the radius of that coin, squared. And what is the radius of the coin? Well, the radius of the coin is this height - is this height right over here. And what is that height? Well it is 1-f(x). So that is equal to the radius. So the area - the surf- the area - the kind of the face of this coin is going to be pi - the area of the face of this coin is going to be pi times the radius squared, which is equal to pi times one minus f of x - one minus f of x squared - that's this blue area right over here, and if I want to find the volume of this coin I would multiply it by - by the depth of the coin. So times - so times dx. And if I wanted to find the volume of this entire solid - this entire rotated, i would want to find the sum of all of these volumes. So this is just the disk right over here but I can have another disk, a similar disk that I do right over here, I could have another disk right over here, and I want to take the sum of ALL of those disks. So I want to take - I want to take - so the volume is going to be the sum over all of those disks - so x goes from 0 - which is this bounding point - to x is equal to 1/2, times pi(1-f(x))^2 - this is the area of e- the fa- the area of the face of each of those disks and then I multiply time the depth of each of those disks - no this gives the volume of each of those disks, and I'm taking the sum of all of them. So this is the volume - this is the volume if I were to just rotate f(x) around y=1 - actually I should just write dx here - and so this right over here - this expression - I just did that so they really are equal - this is obviously just the volume of each of those disks. So this is the volume if I were to take f(x) around y=1. Let's figure out - so let me call this volume of f(x) - and by the same logic - the same exact logic - we can figure out the volume if we take g(x) - if we rotate g(x) around - if we rotate g(x) - if we construct disks like this and rotate them around y=1. And so the volume - if I take g(x) around y=1 would be 0 to 1/2 times pi(1-g(x) - cause 1-g(x) is each of these radius' right over here - each of these radius' - that squared, dx. And so the volume of what they're asking us - the volume of the solid generated when R is rotated - well R is kind of the space in between f(x) and g(x) - so so what's going to be - is g- the volume is going to be the difference between these volumes - it's going to be this volume - this is kind of the outer volume, and we're going to take out its hollow core - we're going to hollow it out be subtracting this volume. So the volume of that region is going to be the integral - I'll do this in a new color - integral from 0 to 1/2 of pi(1-f(x))^2 dx MINUS the integral from 0 to 1/2 of pi(1-g(x))^2 dx and this is completely valid answer but you might want to simplify it we have the same bounds of integration - we have the same variable of integration - and actually we have this pi over here so we could just factor that out - and so this is the same thing as pi times the integral from 0 to 1/2 of (1-f(x))^2 MINUS (1-g(x))^2 - and then all of that dx. And then - and actually you probably would want to do the - you probably would want to do this while taking the AP Exam, not just leaving it in terms of f(x) and g(x) - you would actually want to write the expression for what f(x)... f(x) and g(x) are. So really the best answer would probably be: pi times the integral from 0 to 1/2, times [1(1-... well f(x) is 8x to the third power - 8x to the third power, squared. Minus, (1-g(x)... and g(x) is sin of pi x. That squared - that squared times dx. And that would be our answer and you could see why they didn't want us to go through the trouble of evaluating it - they just wanted us to set up this integral. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #4a | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
The continuous
function f is defined on the interval
negative 4 is less than or equal to x is less
than or equal to 3. The graph of f consists of two
quarter circles and one line segment. So this right here is
one quarter circle, then we have another
quarter circle, and then it has this
line segment over here, as shown in the figure above. I put the figure on
the side, so that we have some screen real
estate down here. Let g of x be equal to 2x plus
the definite integral from 0 to x of f of t dt. All right, that's a
little bit interesting. Now, let's do Part a. Part a. Find g of negative 3. So we want to find
g of negative 3. So first of all, it
tells us what g of x is. So g of negative 3,
every time we see an x, we just put a negative 3 there. So it's going to
be 2 times negative 3 plus the definite integral
from 0 to negative 3, f of t dt. So this first part is
pretty straightforward. 2 times negative
3 is negative 6. And then this part
right over here is the definite integral from
0 to negative 3 of f of t dt. So this is essentially
the area under f of t or under f of x, if you want to
view it that way from 0 to 3. And this is pretty
straightforward to figure out but we
have to be careful here. Because this area
right over here, this would be the integral
let me do this in a color that you can see. That area right
over there would be the integral from
negative 3 to 0 f of t, or we could even say f of t
dt or f of x dx, either way. That would be this
area right over here. They've swapped it. They have the larger
number as the lower bound. They have 0 as the lower bound. So what we could do,
we could rewrite this. This is the same thing,
this is equal to negative 6 minus if you swap the
bounds of integration, you swap the sign
on the integral. So we could say minus from
negative 3 to 0 of f of t dt. And now this thing right over
here this expression right over here is the area
under this quarter circle. And the area under
this quarter circle, we can just use a little bit
of geometry to figure that out. We know its radius. The radius here is 3. Radius is equal to 3. The entire circle
is pi r squared. So the entire circle
the area if this was an entire circle right over
here that area would be pi r squared. So pi times 3 squared. So 9 pi. So it would be 9 pi, but this is
only 1/4 of the entire circle. So we want to divide it by 4. So this right over here we'll
evaluate to 9 pi over 4. So Part a, we get it's
equal to negative 6, that's that right over there,
minus 9 pi over 4. And that's at least the
first part of Part a. Then they say find g prime of x. So let's find g prime of x. We did the first part of
Part a right over there. Then we need to
find g prime of x. Well, it's just going to be
the derivative of g of x. The derivative of 2x
is just going to be 2. And then the derivative and
this is the fundamental theorem of calculus right over
here the derivative of the definite integral
from 0 to x of f of t dt, that's just going to be f of x. So that is g prime of x. We did this second
part right over there. That is g prime of x. And then we need to
evaluate it at negative 3. So g prime of
negative 3 is going to be equal to 2
plus f of negative 3, which is equal to 2 plus and
let's look at our let's see what f of negative 3 is. This is our function definition. When x is equal to negative
3, our function is at 0. So f of negative 3 is just 0. So it's just two plus
0, which is equal to 2. So g of negative
3 is equal to 2. And we're done with Part a. And the trickiest
part of this is just realizing the bounds
of integration. That you might be tempted to
say, oh, the integral between 0 and negative 3, that's
just this area over here because we're going
between 0 and negative 3. But you've got to
realize that we actually have to swap them and make
them negative if you really want to consider this
area right over here. That this integral is going to
be the negative of this area. And that's what we did when we
went through this step right over there. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #4b | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part b. "Determine the x-coordinate
of the point at which g has an absolute maximum
on the interval negative 4 is less than or equal to x,
is less than or equal to 3. And justify your answer." So let's just think about
it in general terms. If we just think about
a general function over an interval, where it
could have an absolute maximum. So let me draw some
axes over here. And I'm speaking in
general terms first, and then we can go back
to our function g, which is derived from this
function f right over here. So let's say that these
are my coordinate axes, and let's say we care
about some interval here. So let's say this is the
interval that I care about. A function could look
something like this. And in this case,
its absolute maximum is going to occur at the
beginning of the interval. Or a function could look
something like this. And then the absolute
maximum could occur at the end
point of the interval. Or the other possibility
is that the function looks something like this. At which point,
the maximum would be at this critical point. And I say critical point, as
opposed to just a point where the slope is zero, because
it's possible to the functions not differentiable there. You could imagine a function
that looks like this, and maybe wouldn't be
differentiable there. But that point there still
would be the absolute maximum. So what we really
just have to do is evaluate g at the different
endpoints of this interval, to see how high it gets,
or how large of a value we get for the g
at the end points. And then we have to see if g has
any critical points in between. And then evaluate
it there to see if that's a candidate
for the global maximum. So let's just evaluate g
of the different points. So let's start off, let's
evaluate g at negative 4 at kind of the lowest
end, or the starting point of our interval. So g of negative 4 is
equal to 2 times negative 4 plus the integral from 0
to negative 4 f of t dt. The first part is very easy, 2
times negative 4 is negative 8. Let me do it over here so
I have some real estate. So this is equal to negative 8. And instead of leaving this
as 0 to negative 4 f of t dt, let's change the bounds
of integration here. Especially so that we can get
the lower number as the lower bound. And that way, it
becomes a little bit more natural to think
of it in terms of areas. So this expression
right here can be rewritten as the
negative of the integral between negative
4 and 0 f of t dt. And now this expression
right over here is the area under f of
t, or in this case, f of x or the area under f
between negative 4 and 0. So it's this area
right over here. And we have to be careful,
because this part over here is below the x-axis. So this we would
consider negative area when we think of it
in integration terms. And this would be positive area. So the total area here is
going to be this positive area minus this area right over here. So let's think
about what this is. So this area This section
over here we did this in part a, actually, This section
this is a quarter circle, so it's 1/4 so these
are both quarter circles. So we could multiply 1/4 times
the area of this entire circle, if we were to draw the entire
thing all the way around. It has a radius of 3. So the area of the entire circle
would be pi times 3 squared or it would be 9 pi. And of course we're
going to divide it by 4 multiply it by 1/4 to
just get this quarter circle right over there. And then this area
right over here, the area of the entire
circle, we have a radius of 1. So it's going to be
pi times 1 squared. So it's going to be
pi, and then we're going to divide it
by four, because it's only one fourth of that circle. And we're going
to subtract that. So we have negative pi
and we were multiplying it times 1/4 out here,
because it's just a quarter circle in either case. And we're subtracting
it, because the area is below the x-axis. And so this simplifies to
this is equal to 1/4 times 8 pi, which is the
same thing as 2 pi. Did I do that right? 1/4 times 8 pi. So this all simplifies to 2 pi. So g of negative 4 is equal
to negative 8 minus 2 pi. So clearly it is a
negative number here. More negative than negative 8. So let's try the other bounds. So let's see what
g of positive 3 is. I'll do it over here so
I have some more space. So g of positive 3,
when x is equal to 3, that we go back to our
definition that is 2 times 3 plus the integral
from 0 to 3 f of t dt. And this is going to be
equal to 2 times 3 is 6. And the integral from 0
to 3 f of t dt, that's this entire area. So we have positive
area over here. And then we have an equal
negative area right over here because it's below the x-axis. So the integral from 0 to
3 is just going to be 0, you're going to have
this positive area, and then this negative
area right over here is going to completely
cancel it out. Because it's symmetric
right over here. So this thing is going
to evaluate to 0. So g of 3 is 6. So we already know that
our starting point, g of negative 4 that when
x is equal to negative 4 that is not where g
hits a global maximum. Because that's a
negative number. And we already
found the end point, where g hits a positive value. So negative 4 is
definitely not a candidate. x is equal to 3 is still in the
running for the x-coordinate where g has a global
absolute maximum. Now what we have
to do is figure out any critical points
that g has in between. So points in there where
it's either undifferentiable or its derivative is equal to 0. So let's look at
this derivative. So g prime of x we just take
the derivative of this business up here. Derivative of 2x is 2. Derivative of this definition
going from 0 to x of f of t dt we did that in part a, this
is just the fundamental theorem of calculus this
is just going to be plus f of x right over there. So it actually
turns out that g is differentiable over
the entire interval. You give any x value
over this interval, we have a value for f of x.
f of x isn't differentiable everywhere, but
definitely f of x is defined everywhere,
over the interval. So you'll get a number here,
and obviously two is just two, and you add two to it, and
you get the derivative of g at that point in the interval. So g is actually differentiable
throughout the interval. So the only critical
points would be where this derivative
is equal to 0. So let's set this
thing equal to 0. So we want to solve the
equation I'll just rewrite it actually So we want to solve
the equation g prime of x is equal to 0, or 2 plus
f of x is equal to 0. You can subtract
2 from both sides, and you get f of x is
equal to negative 2. So any x that satisfies f
of x is equal to negative 2 is a point where the
derivative of g is equal to 0. And let's see if f of x is equal
to negative 2 at any point. So let me draw a line
over here at negative 2. We have to look at it visually,
because there's only given us this visual
definition of f of x. Doesn't equal negative 2,
doesn't equal to negative 2, only equals negative
2 right over there. And it looks like we're at about
2 and 1/2, but let's get exact. Let's actually figure out
the slope of the line, and figure out what
x value actually gives f of x equal
to negative 2. And we could figure out the
slope of this line fairly visually or figure out the
equation of this line fairly visually, we can
figure out its slope. If we run 3 if our
change in x is 3, then our change in y,
our rise, is negative 6. Change in y is
equal to negative 6. Slope is rise over run, or
change in y over change in x. So negative 6 divided
by 3 is negative 2. It has a slope of negative 2. And actually, I could
have done that easier. Where if we go forward
one, we go down by 2. So we could have seen that
the slope is negative 2. So this part of
f of x, we have y is equal to negative
2x plus and then the y-intercept is
pretty straightforward. This is at 3 1, 2, 3. Negative 2x plus 3. So part of f of x
where clearly it equals negative 2 at some point
of that this part of f of x is defined by this line. Obviously this part of f of x
is not defined by that line. But to figure out
the exact value, we just have to figure
out when this line is equal to negative 2. So we have negative 2x plus
3 is equal to negative 2. And remember, this isn't
this is what f of x is equal to, over the interval
that we care about. If we were talking
about f of x over there, we wouldn't be able to
put a negative 2x plus 3, we would have to have some form
of equation for these circles. But right over here, this is
what f of x is, and now we can solve this pretty
straightforwardly. So we can subtract
3 from both sides, and we get negative 2x
is equal to negative 5. Divide both sides
by negative 2, you get x is equal to negative
5 over negative 2, which is equal to 5/2. Which is exactly
what we thought it was when we looked
at it visually. It looked like we were
at about 2 and 1/2, which is the same thing as 5/2. Now we don't know what this is. We don't know if this
is an inflection point. Is this a maximum? Is this a minimum? So really we just
want to evaluate g at this point to see if it gets
higher than when we evaluate g at 3. So let's evaluate g at 5/2. So g at 5/2 is going
to be equal to 2 times 15/2 plus the integral
from 0 to 5/2 of f of t dt. So this first part right over
here, the 2's cancel out. So this is going
to be equal to 5. And then plus the
integral from 0 to 5/2. Now, you might be able
to do it visually, but we know what the value is
of f of t over this interval, we already figured out
the equation for it over this interval. So it's the integral of
negative 2x plus 3 dt. And then let's
just evaluate this. Let me get some real estate. So this is let me
draw a line here., so we don't get confused. So this is going to
be equal to 5 plus and then I take
the antiderivative. The antiderivative of negative
2x is negative x squared. So we have negative x squared. And the antiderivative of
3 is just going to be 3x. So plus 3x. And we're going to
evaluate it from 0 to 5/2. So this is going to
be equal to 5 plus and I'll do all this
stuff right over here. I'll do this stuff in green. So when we evaluate
it at 5/2, this is going to be
negative 5/2 squared. So it's going to be
negative 25 over 4 plus 3 times 5/2,
which is 15 over 2. And then from that,
we're going to subtract this evaluated at 0. But negative 0 squared
plus 3 times 0 is just 0. So this is what
it simplifies to. And so what do we
have right over here? So let's get our ourselves
a common denominator. Looks like a common denominator
right over here could be 4 So this is equal to
5 is the same thing as 20 over 4 minus 25 over
4 and then plus 30 over 4. So 20 plus 30 is
50 minus 25 is 25. So this is equal to 25 over 4. And 25 over 4 is the
same thing as 6 and 1/4. So when we evaluate our
function at this critical point, at this thing where the
slope, or the derivative, is equal to 0, we
got 6 and 1/4, which is higher than six, which is
what g was at this end point. And it's definitely higher
than what g was a negative 4. So the x-coordinate
of the point at which g has an absolute maximum,
on the interval negative 4 to three is x is equal to 5/2. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #4c | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part C. Find all values of
x on the interval negative 4 is less than x is less than
3 for which the graph of g has a point of inflection. Give a reason for your answer. So an inflection
point is a point where the sign of the
second derivative changes. So if you take the second
derivative at that point, or as we go close to that point,
or as we cross that point, it goes from
positive to negative or negative to positive. And to think about
that visually, you could think
of some examples. So if you have a curve that
looks something like this, you'll notice that over
here the slope is negative, but it's increasing. It's getting less
negative, less negative. Then it goes to 0. Then it keeps increasing. Slope is increasing, increasing,
all the way to there, and then it starts
getting less positive. So it starts decreasing. So it's increasing. The slope is increasing over
at this point right over here. So even though the
slope is negative, it's getting less
negative over here. So it's increasing. And then the slope
keeps increasing. It keeps on getting
more and more positive up to about this point. And then the slope is
positive, but then it becomes less positive. So the slope begins
decreasing after that. So this right over here
is a point of inflection. The slope has gone from
increasing to decreasing. And if the other thing
happened, if the slope went from decreasing to
increasing, that would also be a
point of inflection. So if this was maybe some
type of a trigonometric curve, then you might see
something like this. And so this also would it
be a point of inflection. But for this, our g of x is kind
of hard to visualize the way they've defined it
right over here. So the best way to
think about it is just figure out where its second
derivative has a sign change. And to think about that, we have
to find its second derivative. So let's write g of x over here. We know g of x is equal to
2x plus the definite integral from 0 to x of f of t dt. We've already taken
its derivative, but we'll do it again. g prime of x is equal to 2
plus fundamental theorem of calculus. The derivative of this right
over here is just f of x. And if we have the second
derivative of g g prime prime of x this is equal to
derivative of 2 is just 0. And then derivative of
f of x is f prime of x. So asking where this has a
sign change, asking where our second derivative
has a sign change, is equivalent to asking where
does the first derivative of f have a sign change? And asking where the
first derivative of f has a sign change is
equivalent to saying where does the slope of
f have a sign change? You can view this as the slope
or the instantaneous slope of f. So we want to know when the
slope of f has a sign change. So let's think about. Over here, the
slope is positive. It's going up. It's up. It's increasing,
but it's positive. And that's what we care about. So let's write it. I'll do it in green. So the slope is positive
this entire time. It's increasing. It's increasing. It's positive. It's getting less positive now. It's starting to decrease, but
the slope is still positive. The slope is still
positive all the way until we get right over there. You can see it gets
pretty close to zero. And then the slope
gets a negative. And then right over here,
the slope is negative. The slope is negative
right over here. So this is interesting. Because even though f is
actually not differentiable right here so f is not
differentiable at that point right over there. And you could see it because the
slope goes pretty close to 0, and then it just
jumps to negative 3. So you have a discontinuity
of the derivative right over there, but we do
have a sign change. We go from having
a positive slope on this part of
the curve to having a negative slope over
this part of the curve. So we experience a sign
change right over here at x is equal to 0, a sign
change in the first derivative of f, which is the same
thing as saying a sign change in the second
derivative of g. And a sign change in the
second derivative of g tells us that, when x is
equal to 0, the graph of g has a point of inflection. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #4d | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part d, find the average rate of change of
f on the interval from x is greater than or equal, negative four is less than or
equal to x, which is less than or equal to
three. So really the interval that they've
depicted right over here. And then they say there's no point c
between in that interval for which f prime of c is equal to the average
rate of change. Explain why the statement does not
contradict the Mean Value theorem. Fascinating. Alright. Let's do this first part first. The average rate of change of f on the
interval. Sounds like a very fancy thing, but the
average rate of change on the interval is really just a slope of the line that
connects the end points of the interval. So these, this right over here, those are
the end points, and let's figure out the slope of
that line. So, going we, going from this point to
that point, our change in x, we do this in a color that you're
likely to see. Our change in x over here, our change in
x, change in x, is equal to 7. And you can get that by taking 3 minus
negative 4 or you could literally just count, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. That's our change in x. And our change in y, when we, when we run
over 7, when we go 7 to the right, our change in y, our change
in y is equal to negative 2. We went from negative 1 to negative 3 is
equal to negative 2. So, slope, slope, which is change in y
over change in x, rise over run. Is equal to 7 over negative 2, or well
actually let me, the other way around. The change in y is negative 2 over 7. So negative two 7s and that's all it is. Now you could, you could kind of. Think of it in, in, kind of a more fancy sense, but you're gonna get the
exact same answer if you said, oh well look, you know, the
average, the average rate of change of f on the
interval. Well, the rate of change of f is f prime,
f prime of x. That is the rate of change of f at any
point x. And so if you want to find the average
value of this over the interval, you would
integrate it from our starting point, from negative 4 to 3
dx, and then you would divide it by your change in
x. So then you would divide it by, you would
have it over 1 over 7. Over 1 over 7. But then this, this part right over here
is just going to be the same thing as f of 3 minus f of 4. And then this over here you have a 7 in
the denominator. So this is really just your change in x. This is your change in x which is, which
was by definition or how we, how we actually set up this
average right over here. And this over here is really just your
change in y. So it really is just a slope between the
end points. So, we did the first part. Our average rate of change of f on the
interval is negative two 7s. And then let's think about the second
part. You see there is no point c in that
interval. For which f prime of c is equal to the
average rate of change. Explain why this statement does not
contradict the Mean Value Theorem. So the Mean Value Theorem, just as a
little bit of a review, as a little bit of review, it says that if we
have some type of an interval. If you have an interval. So, let me draw some axes right over here. If you have an interval. Let me draw an interval like this. And over that interval you have a
differentiable function. You have a differentiable function, so
maybe my function looks like this. It says at least, there is at least one
point c on that interval where the derivative at that point c is
equal to the average rate of change. So the way I've drawn it right over here,
the average rate of change of this function, I'll do it in
magenta, is this right over here. And the Mean Value Theorem says, is it, if
this is deferentiable, there's at least one
point c in this interval. Where I have the same slope. Where the tangent line has the same slope. Where the derivative is the same as the
slope, as that average slope. And you can see here, is probably right
over here you have one of those points and actually we
probably have multiple of them. We probably have another point right over
here that's like that, and then another point there
that's like that. And if you think about it, it's kind of. It's kind of intuitive that at some point, you know, here we're, we obviously have a
larger slope and over we have a smaller slope and since our, since it's differentialable,
our derivative is continuous. So at some point, at some point the slope has to get to exactly what the average
slope is. Now, let's think about our little conundrum with this question right over
here. Why is there not a point c for which f prime of c is equal to the average rate of
change? You can even verify that for yourself
because from negative 4 to 0 our slope is
positive. We have a positive slope here, and then
the slope just jumps down to negative 2. It just jumps down to negative 2 which is
a much more negative slope than this. So, it never goes to negative 2 7s, and
the reason is that. This is not a differentiable function at x
is equal to 0. It is not differentiable at x equals 0. Our slope jumps here and because it's not differentiable the Mean Value theorem
doesn't apply. Now you can imagine if this was
differentiable, if this did have a continuous derivative, then you
would find a point. So if this looks something like this
instead, I'll continue it over here. If it looks something like this instead where it was, it had a continuous
derivative then there would be a point where the
slope was the same as the average slope. Maybe it would have been right over there. So it's really because, it's really
because f is not differentiable over the entire
interval. It does not have a continuous derivative. The derivative jumps from a, from a
positive value approaching 0 here and it jumps just straight down to
negative 2 right over here. It doesn't go continuously through all the
values in between. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #5a | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Problem 5. "At the beginning
of 2010, a landfill contained 1,400
tons of solid waste. The increasing
function W" so I guess W constantly increases
"the increasing function W models the total amount
of solid waste stored at the landfill. Planners estimate that W
will satisfy the differential equation." so the derivative
of W with respect to time is equal to 1 over 25 times
the quantity W minus 300, "for the next 20 years. W is measured in tons. t is measured in years
from the start of 2010." All right, let's get into this. So part a. "Use the tangent line
to the graph of W at t equals 0 to approximate
the amount of solid waste that the landfill contains at
the end of the first 3 months of 2010." So since time is in years, 3
months would be 1/4 of a year. So t equals 1/4. So it seems at first
this is really daunting. They gave us a
differential equation. We don't even know what
the actual function W is. How do we figure out
its tangent line? But we just have
to kind of think about what they're asking. So regardless of what
W looks like so let's think about it a little bit. So we don't know yet what
W actually does look like. But they tell us it's
an increasing function. So at time 0 it has
1,400 tons in it. They tell us that right up here. And that it increases. We don't know what the function
actually does look like. But let's say that
that is W. So what they're saying in
problem a is use a tangent line to the
graph at t equals 0. Let me draw a W a
little bit differently. So W might look like this. So what they're saying
is, find the tangent line, find the slope of that
tangent line at t equals 0. So there's some slope
right over there. And then we can use
this slope to create a linear approximation
of where we're going to be a quarter
of a year from then. So although we don't
know what W is just yet, we could take the slope
of this line out so this is our t axis
to t is equal to 1/4. And wherever that line takes us
out after a fourth of a year, that will be at least
a decent approximation. We're extrapolating forward
from that first point and the current slope. So we really just have to figure
out the slope of this line, and just see where that line
is at t is equal to 1/4. And you say, wait. How do we know what
the derivative of W is at 0 without knowing W? And that's where
we can go straight to this differential equation. We could actually rewrite
this differential equation using slightly
different notation. This is the derivative
of W with respect to t. We could write that as W
prime of t is equal to 1 over 25 times the function
W, which is a function of t, minus 300. And when you look
at it this way, it becomes a little
bit clearer on how to figure out what the
derivative of W is at 0. The slope of that line
literally is just the derivative of W evaluated at 0. So let's literally take
the derivative of W and evaluate it at 0. So we have W prime
of 0 is equal to 1 over 25 times W of
0, which we know. We know this is 1,400
tons of solid waste. This is how much waste
there is at time 0. Minus 300. So this right over
here is 1,400. And so we have W prime
at time equals 0. So our slope at time equals
0, or our derivative at time equals 0, is equal to 1 over 25
times 1,400 minus 300 is 1,100. And 25 goes into
1,100 44 times, right? It goes four times
into each 100. We have 11 hundreds here. So it'll go 44 times. So it goes 44. So the slope of that line is 44. We could say m for slope. Or actually, let me just
write down the word. The slope of this line is 44. And I just ate some
peanuts or something. So my voice is a little dry. So bear with me. But the slope of
this line is 24. So how do we use that
to find an approximation for the amount of waste
that the landfill contains at the end of the
first three months? Well, let me zoom
in a little bit. And actually, my fingers
are all salty, too. So maybe I don't have a
proper grip on my pen. But I'll try my best. Let me just zoom in
a little bit more. So we're starting at 1,400 tons. So this is my W-axis. This is my time axis. We're starting at 1,400 tons. And we are increasing
from there. They're telling us that it
is an increasing function. So maybe it looks
something like that. And then our slope
right over here. And I don't know,
I haven't drawn W exactly that accurately. I'm just guessing what it
might look like at this point. The tangent line
has a slope of 44. So that is our tangent line. And what that's
saying is if we go out one unit of time,
which is one year, then we would have
gone up 44 in tonnage. So if we use this line as an
approximation, after one year, at this point, would
have 1,444 tons. But we're not trying to
approximate a year out. We're trying to approximate
1/4 of a year out. So we're trying to approximate. So this would be
half a year out. This is 1/4 of a year out. We're trying to approximate
that point right over there. So it's going to be 1,400,
this point right over here. And we could write down
the equation of this line, if we like. We could say this
line so we'll call this the W approximation,
because this isn't exactly our W function this is equal
to the slope of our line, 44, times time, plus
our W intercept, we could say, or plus our
initial condition, plus 1,400. So if you put time is
equal to 1/4 in there, you get it equal to 44. So let me write it this way. So our approximate W, at time
is equal to 1/4 of a year, is equal to 44 times
1/4 plus 1,400. I'm running out of space. And my salty hands are having
trouble writing this properly. And so 44 times 1/4, or 44
divided by 4, is 11 plus 1,400. And so you add them together. You get 1,411 or 1,411 tons. This is our approximation. We just took the slope
from our starting point and used that slope
as an approximation. It probably is not
the exact amount of tonnage based on
the actual function W. But it's an OK approximation. But that's our first answer
for Part A. 1,411 tons. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #5b | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Now ready for part b. And I've wiped all the
salt off of my fingers, and I've had a glass of water. So now I'm ready
for some business. Find the second derivative
of W with respect to t in terms of W. Use
this second derivative to determine whether your answer
in part a is an underestimate or overestimate for the
amount of solid waste that the landfill contains
at time t equals 1/4. So let's do the
first things first. Let's find the second
derivative in terms of W. And we already have the
first derivative over here. And in part a, I rewrote it
just with slightly different notation. But I'll just use this just
because I need to write down here and I can still
refer to this thing. So let's just take
the derivative of both sides of this
differential equation with respect to t. So you take the derivative
of this left-hand side with respect to t, you
get the second derivative of W with respect to t as a
function of t is equal to now you take the derivative
of this with respect to t. This is the same thing
as 1/25Wt minus 12. And so when you
take the derivative, that constant part drops
off, and you're just left with 1/25 times
the derivative of Wt. Let me make that clear. This is the same thing as 1/25W
as a function of t minus 12. 1/25 of 300 is 12. And you take the
derivative of this, you get 1/25 times the
first derivative of W and then the derivative of this
with respect to t is just 0. A constant, obviously, does
not change with respect to t. And so we get this
right over here. Now this is the
second derivative in terms of the
first derivative. But the question asks us,
write the second derivative in terms of W. But
lucky for us, we know how to express
this as a function of W. They gave that to
us in the problem. This was given. This is just me rewriting
it in a different notation. So this is going to
be the same thing as 1/25 times the derivative
of W. And the derivative of W is this. The differential
equation literally tell us the derivative
of W is this over here. So 1 over 25 times Wt, the
function W as a function of t, minus 300. And so we can say the
second derivative let me write it a little
smaller so I don't waste space. The second derivative
of W as a function of t is equal to 1/625 times
W as a function of t, which is a function
of t, minus 300. So we've done the first part. We've found out the
second derivative of W in terms of just W. Now let's try to address the
second part of their question. So we did the first part. Now use what we just
figured out to determine whether your answer in
part a is an underestimate or an overestimate of
the amount of solid waste that the landfill
contains at time 1/4. So in part a, we
found the slope. We found the slope of the
tangent line at time equals 0, and we used that slope
to extrapolate out to 3 months, or time
equals 1/4, 1/4 of a year. Now if the function
W's slope over that 1/4 was exactly the same as the
slope of the tangent line, or if that slope did not
change, then our extrapolation would be exactly right. If W's slope is
increasing over that time, then our estimate would
be an underestimate of the correct thing. And if the slope is
decreasing over that time, then our estimate would
be an overestimate of the actual amount
in the landfill. And to figure out whether
the slope is increasing or decreasing, we
just have to look at the value of the
second derivative. If the second
derivative is positive, that means our
slope is increasing, which means that our
extrapolation would be an understatement. Let me just be clear here. Let me draw this. Let me make it very clear. So let me just draw
a random function. So let's say that's W. So this
is a case where W's slope is increasing faster,
or W's slope is increasing from
that starting point. So our starting point
this was our slope. And then W's slope keeps
increasing from there. And in this case,
our estimate is going to be underestimate
of where W actually is after 1/4 of the year. If W's slope is exactly the same
as our function over the course of the first three months, it
would look something like that. Maybe it diverges later on. And in this case,
our approximation would be really good. It would probably
be exact for W. And if W's slope,
for whatever reason, goes negative after that point,
and they already tells us it's an increasing function,
so that is not likely. Or it could it doesn't
have to even go negative. If W's slope decreases, it
could still stay positive. And the way I drew it, it
doesn't let me draw it like this, just to make it clear. So let's say we find out that
the slope looks something like this. This is the slope of the
tangent line at time equals 0. If W's slope increases
from that point, then w might look
something like that. And then our answer to part
a would be an understatement, would be an underestimate
of where W actually is after a fourth of a year. Let me draw it and make it
clear to you what I'm doing. So this is my w-axis. So this is right at our
initial condition of 1,400. And then this right over
here is our time axis, and this is that 1/4. So in the last
video, we said, hey, this is sitting right at 1,411. If W's slope increases
from that point, then this is an underestimate. If W's slope stays
the same, then this is actually a very good
estimate because then we're going to hit that
point directly with W. And if W's slope decreases
so you can imagine maybe W looks something like this. It has that slope of the
tangent line when it starts, but then the slope decreases. And it's still an
increasing function, but the slope is decreasing. And in that case, we would
have an overestimate. And this is a situation
so this first situation, slope is increasing. That means W prime
prime is positive. The slope is increasing. The second derivative
is positive. This would be a
byproduct of or this would cause the second
derivative to be negative. Our slope is decreasing. And this would be our
second derivative. Our second derivative is 0. If your slope isn't changing
if your slope is constant, if your first
derivative is constant, your second derivative
is going to be 0. So let's just see what
our second derivative is at our initial
condition, and then we'll have a pretty good
sense of whether we have an overestimate or an
underestimate for part a. So let's just figure out
what our second derivative at time 0. It's going to be equal to 1/625
times W of 0, which we know, minus 300. Well W of 0, the amount of
waste we have at time 0, they told us in the
problem, is 1,400 tons. 1,400 minus 1,300 is 1,100. And then 1,100 minus
or 1,100 divided by 625 is a small number. It's 1. something. But it is a positive number. And that's the
important thing here. So this thing, all of this
business, it is positive. So the second
derivative is positive, which means the
slope is increasing. At least right at our starting
point, our slope is increasing. Since our slope is increasing
from that point and frankly, the fact that it's
increasing at all and that we know the W is
an increasing function tells us that our estimate in
part a is an underestimate. So this is the case
that we're dealing with. So our estimate in part
a is an underestimate of the actual amount of solid
waste in the landfill at time t equals 1/4. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #5c. | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part C, find the
particular solution W as a function of t to
the differential equations, derivative of W
with respect to t is equal to 1 over
25 times w minus 300, with initial condition, at
time 0, W is equal to 1,400. And the units in this problem,
it was 1,400 tons they told us. So it might seem strange to
see a differential equations problem on an AP exam. You say, wait, this isn't fair. This isn't a differential
equations class. And the thing to keep in
mind is if, on an AP exam, you see differential
equations, they're really asking you to solve
a differential equation that can be solved using
the skills that you would learn in an AP class. And the main class of
differential equations that you could
solve are the ones that are separable
differential equations. The ones where you can
separate the independent and the dependent variables. And if you don't have any
idea what I'm talking about, I'm about to show you. So let me rewrite this
differential equation. We have dw, dt is equal to
1 over 25 times W minus 300. Now this differential
equation, we have W here. And we have this dt. But we don't have
t anywhere else. So what I want to do is I want
to get the parts that involve W onto the left-hand
side, and I want to get anything that deals
with dt on the right-hand side. So let's divide both sides of
this equation by w minus 300. So we would have 1
over W minus 300 dw dt the derivative of
W with respect to t is equal to I divide
this side by W minus 300, so it's equal to 1 over 25. Now I want to get the
dt's on this side. So let's multiply
both sides by dt. [INAUDIBLE] the
differential is just a very, very small change in t. And so we get and I'm a little
bit imprecise with my notation here. But this is one way that
you can think about it when you are dealing with the
differential equations like this, separable
differential equations. You have 1 over W minus
300 dw let me make sure that the dw doesn't look like
it's in the denominator dw is equal to 1 over 25 dt. And now we can integrate both
sides, which is essentially just saying that we're taking
since this is equal to this that each little
increment of W times this is equal to each little
increment of dt times 1 over 25. We can then say, well, if we sum
up all of the increments of W times this quantity
if we sum up the infinite number of
infinitesimally small increments that would be
the same thing as summing up all of these characters. Because each of these
characters is really the same as each of
these characters. So let's do that sum. We're essentially just
integrating both sides of this. And here, you might be able
to do this in your head. Or we could do the
formal u substitution, just to make it clear
what we're doing. If you said u is equal to W
minus 300, then what is du? If you wanted the differential. So if you want to take
the derivative of u with respect to W, you would
say du with respect to W is equal to what? It is equal to 1. The derivative of this
with respect to W is 1. Or if you multiply
both sides times dw, you have du is equal to dw. And so this left-hand side right
over here this integral could be rewritten as the
integral of 1 over u du. We define this as u. And we just saw that du
is the same thing as dw, so this could be
rewritten as du. And this is one of
the basic integrals, so hopefully we've learned. And this is equal to the natural
log of the absolute value of u. Or if you unwind
the substitution, this is equal to the natural
log of the absolute value of W minus 300. So let me write this down. So the left-hand
side right over here. And you might be able
do that in your head. You say, hey, look. You have W minus 300. Its derivative is 1, so
it's essentially there. So I can just take this
as if this was 1 over I could just take the
antiderivative here and treat this whole thing as a variable. So it would just be the natural
log of this entire thing, or the absolute value
of that entire thing. So the integral of
the left-hand side is the natural log of the
absolute value of W minus 300. And the derivative of the
right-hand side and this is a little bit more
straightforward or sorry, the antiderivative with respect
to t on the right-hand side is 1 over 25 t, or we
could say t over 25. And then these are both
indefinite integrals. You could have a constant
on both sides or one side. We could just put it on
one side right over here. You could have put
plus some constant. You could have added
some C1 over here. And then you could've
had C2 over here. But then you could've
subtracted C1 from both sides, and then just have a
C3 constant over here. But to simplify
it, you could just say, look, this is going
to be equal to this plus some constant. You could've put the constant
on that side as well. It doesn't matter. All the constants
would merge into one. Now we've gotten pretty far. We want to solve the
particular solution. Right now, we only
have this constant. And we also haven't written W as
a function of t just right yet. They're implicitly expressed. It is more of a relationship
than a function right now. So the first thing
we can do is try to solve for C. We're told
in the problem that W of 0 is equal to 1400 tons. They told us that. That's one of our
initial conditions. So we know that the natural
log, that when t is equal to 0, W is equal to 1400. So W is equal to 1,400 when
t is equal to 0 plus C. Or another way to
think about it is, the natural log of the absolute
value of 1,100 is equal to C. And obviously, this
is a positive value. So we could just say that C
is equal to the natural log of 1,100. We can drop the
absolute value sign because the absolute
value of 1,100 is 1,100. So now we can rewrite
this part right over here. Let me do it in yellow. Let me start
that's not yellow. Let me start right over here. So we could write
the natural log of the absolute
value of W minus 300. And actually, we know that
W is an increasing function. W starts at 1,400 and
only goes up from there as t gets larger and larger. So if we're starting at
1,400 and only getting larger and larger values
for W, this expression right here is never going to get
negative for positive t values. And that's all we care about. And so we can actually drop
the absolute value sign. This will always be
a positive value. So we could say the absolute
value of W minus 300 is equal to t over
25 and we've just solved for our constant
plus the natural log of 1,100. And now we can just solve
this explicitly for W. We can raise e to both sides. This value is equal
to this value. The left hand side is equal
to the right hand side. So e raised to this power
is the same thing as e raised to that power. So we have e to the
natural log of W minus 300 is going to be equal
to e to the t over 25 plus the natural log of 1,100. Let me take this actually,
just to get the real estate, let me delete that. All right. Now I can keep working
right below that. And so e to the natural
log of something is just going to be
equal to that something. The natural log is what
power do I have to raise e to to get this thing. Well I'm raising
e to that power, so I'm going to get this thing. So the left-hand side
just becomes W minus 300, and the right-hand side,
we could rewrite this as e to the t over 25 times e to
the natural log of 1,100. We have the same base,
different exponents. If you wanted to
simplify this, you would just add the
exponents, which is exactly what we did up here. So these two things
are equivalent. e to the natural log of
1,100, that is 1,100. The natural log of
1,100 is a power that you raise e
to to get to 1,100. So if you raise e to that
power, you get 1,100. So that is 1,100. So we get W minus 300 is equal
to 1,100 e to the t over 25. And then you just add
300 to both sides. W is equal to 1,100 e to
the t over 25 plus 300. And we're done. We have solved the
differential equation. We found the
particular solution. We had to solve for C to find
that particular solution. We're done. And we did it using
just basic integration. We didn't have to use any
of the fancy differential equation solving
tools that you might learn in a more advanced class. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #6a | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Problem number six. Let f be defined by
f of x is equal to and we have two cases. When x is less than or equal
to 0, f is 1 minus 2 sine of x. When x is greater than 0,
f is e to the negative 4x. Show that f is
continuous at x equals 0. So for something to be
continuous at x equals 0, let's think about
what has to happen. So if I have a function
here So that is my x-axis. And let's say this is my y-axis. And we care about what
happens at x equals 0. So x equals 0 there. And let's say that
this is our function. So maybe our function maybe
looks something like this. I don't know. Well, this one in
particular probably looks something like this. This one in particular
might look who knows. And then it might look
something like that. And the particulars
are that important. We just have to think
about what they're asking. In order for it to
be continuous here, so the limit as we
approach 0 from the left should be equal to the
value of the function at 0. So the limit of f of x should
be equal to f of 0, which should be equal to the
limit as we approach from the right, which
should be equal to the limit as we approach 0 from the right. So that should be
equal to the limit as x approaches 0 from
the right of f of x. And the reason why this matters
is, if this wasn't the case, if f of 0 wasn't the
same as the limit, then we might have a
gap right over there. So you could have limits. So you could have a
situation like this, where you have a gap
right over there. And then it looks
something like that. So the two limits from the
left and the right both exist, and the limit at that
point would exist. But if the function itself does
not equal that value there, if it equals something
else, then the function would not be continuous. So that's why the
limit has to be equal to the value of
the function in order for it to be continuous. So let's think about
whether all of these things equal each other. First of all, let's just think
about the value of the function there. So remember, we're doing part a. F of 0 is equal to we're
going to use this first case, because that's the case for
x is less than or equal to 0. So f of 0 is going to be
equal to 1 minus 2 sine of 0. Well, sine of 0 is
0, 2 times 0 is 0. So this whole thing is 0. 1 minus 0 is 1. Fair enough. Now let's think about the
limit as x approaches 0 from the left-hand side. So as we approach 0 from the
left-hand side of f of x. So as we approach 0 from
the left-hand hand side, we're dealing with values
of x that are less than 0. So once again, we're dealing
with this first case up here. So this is the limit
as x approaches 0 from the left-hand side
of 1 minus 2 sine of x. Now, sine of x is continuous. It's a continuous function. So this is going to be the same
thing as 1 minus 2 sine of 0, which we've already figured out,
which is exactly equal to 1. So this is equal to 1. So the value of the limit
as we approach from the left is the same as the
value of the function. Now let's do it for as we
approach from the right as we approach from values
of x greater than 0. So let's think about the
limit as we approach 0 from the right of f of x. So here, we're
dealing with values of x that are larger than 0. So we're dealing with
this case right over here. So that's going to be the
limit as x approaches 0 from the right of e
to the negative 4x. And for the x's that we care
about, or actually in general, this is a continuous function. This is a continuous function. So this is going to
be the same thing as e to the negative 4
times 0, which is just e to the 0,
which is just 1. So this, once again,
is equal to 1. So the function is equal to
1 at that point, the limit as we approach from
the left is equal to 1, and the limit as we approach
from the right is equal to 1. So the function is
continuous there. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #6b | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part B. For x is not
equal to 0, express f prime of x as a
piecewise-defined function. Find the value of x
for which f prime of x is equal to negative 3. So the first thing you
might be wondering is, why did we even have to
take out x is equal to 0, or why is the derivative not
going to be defined there? And that's just
because you're going to see that the derivative is
going to be something different when we approach x is equal to
0 from the left, versus when we approach x is equal
to 0 from the right. And that's why they just
took it out of there for us. But let's just figure out
what that derivative is for all of the
other values of x. So f prime of x is equal
to, so for x is less than 0, we're going to take the
derivative of this first case. So the derivative
of 1 is just 0. The derivative of
negative 2 sine of x. Well, the derivative of sine
of x is just cosine of x. So it's going to be
negative 2 cosine of x for x is less than 0. And then for x is
greater than 0 I'll do this in
another color, I'll do it in orange we have
this case right over here. And we'll just do the
chain rule, derivative of negative 4x with
respect to x is negative 4. And derivative of e to the
negative 4x with respect to negative 4x is just
e to the negative 4x. Sometimes you could say
this is a derivative of the inside times the
derivative of the outside, with respect to the inside. So either way, it's negative
4 e to the negative 4x for x is greater than 0. So we did the first
part, we expressed f prime of x as a
piecewise-defined function. We didn't define the derivative. I actually forgot
a parenthesis here. We didn't define the derivative
when x is equal to 0, because it's actually not
going to be defined there. Now let's do the second part. Find the value of x
for which f prime of x is equal to negative 3. And so if this wasn't
piecewise-defined, you'd very simply
just say, look, f prime of x is
equal to negative 3. You would take whatever
f prime of x is equal to, and you'd do some
algebra to solve for it. But here you're like,
which case do I use? I don't know if the x
that gets us to negative 3 is going to be less
than 0, or I don't know if it's going
to be greater than 0. So I don't know
which case to use. And one thing that
we realize is to look at these functions a
little bit and realize that cosine of x is
a bounded function. Cosine of x can only go between
positive 1 and negative 1. So negative 2
cosine of x can only go between positive
2 and negative 2. So it can never
get to negative 3. So if anything's ever
going to get to negative 3, it's going to have to be
this part of the derivative, or this part of the
derivative definition. So it's going to have to be
this thing right over here. And hopefully
there's some values of x greater than 0 where
this thing right over here is equal to negative 3. So let's try it out. Negative 4 e to the
negative 4x needs to be equal to negative 3. We can divide both
sides by negative 4. We get e to the negative
4x is equal to negative 3/4 divided by negative 4 is 3/4. We could take the natural
log of both sides, and we will get negative 4x
is equal to the natural log of 3/4. And just to be clear, what
I did here, you literally could put the natural log
here, natural log there, and you could put
the natural log there as well to see that step. This is saying, what power do
I have to raise e to, to get e to the negative 4x? Well, obviously, I
just need to raise e to the negative
4x power there. So this power is negative 4x. And then we just
took the natural log of the right-hand side as well. And then to solve for x,
we can divide both sides by negative 4. So you get x is equal to or
we could multiply both sides by negative 1/4, either way
negative 1/4 natural log of 3/4. And what we need to do
is verify that this x. So we used this case right over
here, but we have to make sure that we can use this case,
that this x is greater than 0. And we might be
tempted right when we look at this to
say, wait, this looks like a negative number. But we have to remind ourselves
that the natural log of 3/4, since 3/4 is less than
e, the natural log of 3/4 is going to be a
negative number. It's going to be e to
some negative exponent. So since this is negative
and this part right over here is negative, you have a
negative times a negative, so this right over here
is going to be positive. So this is a positive
value right over here. So you would use this
case right over here. So that's our answer x
is equal to negative 1/4 natural log of 3/4. Or the derivative, we could
write f prime of negative 1/4 times the natural log of
3/4 is equal to negative 3. And we're done. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus AB free response #6c | AP Calculus AB | Khan Academy
Part C, find the
average value of f on the interval negative 1 to 1. So the average
value of a function over an interval is just
going to be so let's just write average. The average value
of our function is just going to be the integral
over the interval negative 1 to 1 of f of x, d of x,
divided by our change in x. Sorry, this is from
negative 1 to 1. And our change in x
is 1 minus negative 1. So this is going to be equal
to 1/2 times the integral. And here, f of x is
piecewise-defined. So what we can do is
break up this integral into two intervals. We can say the integral
of f of x from negative 1 to 0 of f of x dx plus let
me just write it this way so we don't have to
keep rewriting the 1/2. I'll use brackets
plus the integral from 0 to 1 of f of x dx. And the reason why I
broke it up like this is because this function
has a different definition, or it's piecewise-defined. It's different when we're
less than or equal to 0, versus when we are
greater than 0. So that's why I like to
break it up this way. So then we get, this
is equal to 1/2 times and in big brackets like this. This first part
right over here, we can write as the integral
from negative 1 to 0. What is f of x between
negative 1 and 0? It's 1 minus 2 sine of x dx. And then plus this
thing right over here. Plus the integral from 0 to 1. And what is our function
when it's between 0 and 1? It's e to the negative 4x dx. And now we can do each of
these integrals separately. And so this is going
to be equal to 1/2 and once again, I'll do a big
open bracket right over here. My pen is getting loose, let me
tie on the front a little bit better. There you go. All right, back to work. So 1/2, open brackets. And now, let's take
the antiderivative of 1 minus 2 sine
of x, antiderivative of 1 with respect
to x is just x. Negative 2 sine of x. Well, the derivative of cosine
of x is negative sine of x. So this is just going
to be 2 cosine of x. And you can verify that. Derivative of cosine of
x is negative sine of x. You have the 2 out front, so
it's negative 2 sine of x. So we're going to evaluate
that at 0 and at negative 1. And to that, we
are going to add so let's do this definite
integral over here. The antiderivative of
e to the negative 4x is going to be equal to negative
e to the negative 4x over 4. And the way you realize that is,
if this was just an e to the x, then it's antiderivative
would just be e to the x. If you have an e
to the negative 4x, then you know that whatever
its antiderivative is is going to be, essentially,
an e to the negative 4x. But when you take
its derivative, you're going to have
to take the derivative of the negative 4x part
because of the chain rule. And so you're going to have
a negative 4 that comes out. But we don't see a
negative 4 over here, so we're obviously going to
have to divide by negative 4 so it cancels out. Another way to
think about it is, we could have rewritten
we this thing. So this is equal to e
to the negative 4x dx. This is exactly
what our problem is, what we need to take
the definite integral. So then, it becomes
completely clear. So that the derivative of this
thing is sitting around here, we could put a
negative 4 over here. But you can't just willy-nilly
throw a negative 4 there. You would have to put a
negative 1/4 outside of it in order for it to be
negative 1/4 times negative 4. You're just multiplying by 1,
which doesn't change the value. And then here, you'd clearly
see that this right over here is the derivative of
e to the negative 4x. So that you'd have e
to the negative 4x. The antiderivative of this
is e to the negative 4x. And then you have this
negative 1/4 over here. So either way, hopefully
that makes sense. We go into more
detail of that earlier in the calculus playlist. So then this is from
we're going to evaluate it at 1 and at 0, and then we
want to close the brackets. And so, what do we have here? This is equal to 1/2. Once again, open the brackets. If you evaluate
all of this at 0, you get 0 plus 2 cosine of 0. Cosine of 0 is 1. So you just get a 2 when
you evaluate it at the 0. So you get a 2. And then from that, we
want to subtract whatever we get when we evaluate
it at negative 1. We want to subtract negative
1 plus 2 cosine of negative 1. So this whole thing
right over here evaluates to this whole
thing right over there. And then we have plus. We want to evaluate this at 1. So this gives us negative
e to the negative 4. Because negative 4x, when
x is 1, is negative 4. Over 4. And from that, we
need to subtract this thing evaluated at 0. So that's going to be
negative e to the 0 over 4. e to the 0 is 1. So that's just
negative 1 over 4. And once again, all of this is
going to be multiplied by 1/2. And now we just
have to simplify it. So this is equal to well, I'll
just still throw out the 1/2 here. This is equal to 1/2 times
so I'll do this in a new color here. Let me do it well I don't
have too many new colors. OK. So this is equal to 2 plus 1. So this and this together
is going to be equal to 3. And then you have
this negative outside. So that's why it was a plus 1. And then you have a
negative times a positive 2. So minus 2 cosine of negative 1. And then you have
plus or maybe I should say minus minus e
to the negative 4 over 4. And then you have plus 1/4. And then we want to
close our brackets. And then we could do one last
step of simplification here. 3, we could add
the 3 to the 1/4. 3 is the same
thing as 12 over 4. 12 over 4 plus 1/4 is 13/4. So you have 13/4 minus 2
cosine of negative 1 minus e to the negative 4 over 4. And then, of course, you have
your 1/2 sitting out here. And it's not the most
beautiful or simple thing. But this is our answer. This is the average value of
f of x over that interval. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #1a | AP Calculus BC solved exams | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Problem number 1: at time t, a particle moving in the xy-plane is at position (x(t), y(t)), where x(t) and y(t) are not explicitly given. For t is greater than or equal to 0, the derivative of x with respect to t is 4t+1 the derivative of y with respect to t is sin(t^2) and at time t=0, x(0)=0 and y(0)=-4 Fair enough, let's do part a. Find the speed of the particle at time t=3, and find the acceleration vector of the particle at time t is equal to 3 as well. So, the speed is really just the magnitude of the velocity vector. So what's the velocity vector? Our velocity vector as a function of time is going to be equal to the derivative of our x position as a function of time, or we could say the velocity in the x-direction times the i unit vector, plus the velocity in the y-direction times the j unit vector. I just wrote this in engineering notation, obviously there are many ways that you could specify a vector. And, in this case, x'(t), they've already given it to us: x'(t) is 4t+1 they just wrote it as dx/dt. So this over here is 4t+1 times the i unit vector, and then this here, this y'(t), they gave it to us the derivative of y with respect to t is sin(t^2). So, plus sin(t^2) times the j unit vector. That is our velocity vector. So what is our velocity- or this is our velocity vector as a function of time, So what is our velocity at time t=3? Well, we just have to substitute 3 for t, so 4(3)+1 is 13i. Plus 3 squared- 3 squared is 9 -sine of 9. Plus sin9j. Our speed, what they want us to figure out is going to be equal to- or maybe I should write it as our speed at time 3 -our speed is going to be equal to the magnitude of our velocity vector at time 3, which is equal to the magnitude of 13i+(sin9)j. And then this we literally, this is, we use essentially the Pythagorean Theorem to find the magnitude. This is going to be equal to the square root of 169 (that's 13 squared) plus (sin9)^2. So let me get my TI-85 out. This part of the exam we are allowed to use calculators. So we get the square root of 169+(sin9)^2. Alright, that's 13 squared plus sin9 squared. And, we get- we get 13.00- I'll just round it to 7, just to show that we didn't get just straight up 13, that the sin9 squared did do something. So 13.007. So this is approximately equal to 13.007. So we've answered the first part. The speed of the particle at time t=3 is 13.007. Then they want us to find the acceleration vector of the particle at time t=3. So the acceleration vector as a function of time is just going to be the second derivative of x with respect to t, or you'd say the acceleration in the x-direction as a function as a function of time times i, plus the acceleration in the y-direction. So it's the second derivative of y with respect to t in the j-direction. And this, of course, is just going to be equal to the derivative of x of- the derivative of x- the second derivative of x(t) is just the derivative of the first derivative. So the first derivative is 4t+1, you take the derivative of that, you just get 4. So, we get 4i plus... and then the derivative- the second derivative, or the second derivative of y with respect to t is just the derivative of the first derivative. The derivative- the first derivative is sin(t^2), so derivative of that is going to be 2t*cos(t^2), and of course we have our j. We have our j right over there and I just did this from the chain rule. The derivative of t^2 with respect to t is 2t, derivative of sin(t^2) with respect to t^2 is cos(t^2). And so that is the acceleration vector as a function of t but they care at time t is equal to 3. So, 4 still stays 4, then you have 2(3)+cos(9). So let me write this, this is going to be our acceleration vector our acceleration vector at time 3 is going to be 4i plus... and let's just put, if this is 2 times 3, which is 6... (6cos9)j. Let's get the calculator out so we actually get a value there since they allow us to use or almost want us to use a calculator here. So, 6cos9 is negative 5.47, or 5.467 if we want. So, plus negative- oh, what was I doing, this is j -so plus -5.467j. So that is our acceleration vector. And once again, I wrote it in engineering notation (which I'm sure the advanced placement exam people wouldn't mind) but you could also write it in kind-of the paramiterized vector notation or your ordered-pair notation as a vector you could say that the acceleration vector at time 3 you could write it this way too:  These are really specifying the same thing. This is the x-component of the vector, this is the y-component of the vector. This is the x-component of the vector, this is the y-component of the vector. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #1 (b & c) | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Part b find the slope
of the tangent line to the path of the particle
at time t is equal to 3. So the slope of the
tangent line is just going to be equal to
the rate of change of y with respect to x at that point. And this is the same
thing as dy/dt over dx/dt. And dealing with differentials
is a little bit strange, especially when you want
to deal with rigorously, but you can view them as very
little, small changes in y, small changes in,
t small changes in x, small changes in t. When you view it this way,
you could say, hey, look. If I just multiply both
sides, both the numerator and the denominator,
by dt over dt which, if you do view them as
the same small change then they would
cancel out, and you would get back to
the dy over dx. And the reason why
I wrote it this way is that they actually
give us these values. They give us dy/dt and
they give us dx/dt. So if you want to find the
slope at time equals 3, we just have to find dy/dt at
time equals 3 and dx/dt at time equals 3. So dy/dt at time
equals 3 well, this is dy/dt right over here. It's just going to be sine
of 3 squared, or sine of 9. And dx/dt at time 3, that's
just going to be they tell us what dx/dt is
as a function of time. 4 times 3 plus 1. Well, that is equal to 13. And then we can just
get our calculator out and evaluate this. We did a lot of this work
in the first problem. But let's just actually
take the value. So we have sine of 9 divided
by 13 gets as 0.0317. And we're done. That's the slope
of the tangent line to the path of the particle
at time t is equal to 3. I think we have time. We could crank out
part c as well. Part c find the position
of the particle at time t is equal to 3. So they give us x prime of t,
and they give us y prime of t. This is x prime of t. This is y prime of t. We need to figure out
x of x of 3 and y of 3. So if we can, let's
write x of t and y of t and then try to
evaluate them at 3. So let's see. x of
t is going to be equal to the antiderivative
of this right over here. So the antiderivative of 4t
is going to be 2t squared. Take the derivative here. You'll just get 4t. Antiderivative of
1 is t, plus t, and then you're going to
have a plus a constant. Or essentially, we just
took the indefinite integral of this side, of 4t plus 1. So you get your constant here. Because if you take
the derivative, this constant will
obviously disappear. You'll lose that information. Lucky for us, they also gave
us this initial condition. x of 0 is 0, when t is 0,
this term is going to be 0. This term is going to be 0. And they're saying
the whole thing is going to be equal to 0. So c is going to be 0, as well. Let me do that explicitly
just so we don't get confused. So x of 0 is going to be equal
to 0 plus 0 plus c, which they're telling
us is equal to 0. So c is equal to 0. So that tells us
that x of t is going to be equal to 2t
squared plus t. So if you want to
find x of 3, you just evaluate it right over here. So if you want to
find x of 3, it's going to be 2 times 9 plus 3. 2 times 9 is 18, plus 3 is 21. So x of 3 is 21. Now let's try to do y of t. I'll do it in a different color. So let me scroll over to
the right a little bit. So let's say y of t is
equal to so if you try to take the
antiderivative of this, this is not simple to
take the antiderivative of this right over here. It's actually very hard
to do it analytically. Not even clear if you
can do it analytically. Lucky for us, this
part of the AP exam, we are allowed to
use calculators. So we could just say
this is equal to and this is straight from
the fundamental theorem of calculus y of t is equal
to the integral from 0 to t. And I'll just write it
as sine of x squared dx. I didn't want to use a t here
and then use a t, as well. That would make it confusing. So you integrate with
respect to x, and then one of the upper bound
is going to be t. And this is y of t. And of course, you're going
to have to put a constant over here, because if you took
the derivative of this, you would get y of t, and
you'll lose information from this constant. Now, we can figure out
what that constant is, because they tell
us what y of 0 is. So y of 0 is going to be equal
to the integral from 0 to 0. So this part right over
here is going to be 0. So it's going to be equal to
c, which they tell us y of 0 is also equal to negative 4. So we get y of t is equal
to the integral from 0 to t of sine of x
squared dx minus 4. So that's y as a function of t. And we already figured
out what x of 3 is. Now we have to figure
out what y of 3 is. y of 3 is going to be
equal to the integral from 0 to 3 of sine of x
squared dx and then minus 4. And, once again, lucky for us,
we can use calculators here. So let's get the
calculator out, and we want to go to the
catalog of functions. So I press 2nd
Custom here, which gives us this little
catalog thing. And I want to do the
definite integral. And it's actually FN INT. So let me go to the F's. FN INT. So I have to go a
little bit further down. A little bit. There you go. That's my function
that I want to use. This is a definite
integral, and then I want to evaluate the
definite integral of this right over here. So the function is going
to be sine of x squared that's what I want to
evaluate the definite integral of from 0 to 3. And my variable
I need to see what the variable of
integration is first so my variable of
integration is x, and I'm going to go from 0 to 3. And this gives me let the
calculator think a little bit 0.77356, and then to
that so that's just this first part right over here. And then I need to subtract 4. So minus 4 gives negative
3.226, I'll go with. So this is equal
to negative 3.226. Did I write that down right? I have a bad memory. Negative 3.226, and we're done. So y of 3 is equal
to negative 3.226. So the position of
the particle at time t equals 3, if you
wanted a coordinate, it would be 21, negative 3.226. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #1d | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Part d: Find the total distance traveled by the particle over the time interval between time t = 0 and t = 3, or 0 <= t <= 3. So let's draw some axes here to just make sure and you wouldn't obviously have to do this if you were doing it under time pressure during the actual AP exam but my point here to make sure we all are understanding what's going on. So when t = 0, where are we? Well they tell us; x(0) is 0 so x is 0 and y(0) is -4 so we're at the point (0, -4). That's when t = 0 and in the last problem we figured out what happens when t = 3; we figured out that x is at 21. I'll just say that's 21 right over there. x(3) is 21 and y(3) was like -3 point something, so that puts us right over here. So this is 21 and we figured this out in the last problem, I think it was -3.226, and so this is what happens when t = 3. And between these point who knows what the path is. We could plot it if we wanted but it might look something like this, so who knows what it does, and we go like that. And so in are part d right here they're asking us "What is the total distance traveled?", or another way to think about it is "What is the length of this path?" And we could, there is a formula for arc length and if you know it, you could just apply it. It's not a bad thing to know going into the AP exam, especially under time pressure, but I always forget what it is, I'm almost 35 now, so I always like to re-derive it and there's always something a little bit satisfying about that too because we remind ourselves why the formula works. Well how do we figure a little bit of that arc length? So actually let me do a little other part; I like this part more. So let's say, "How do we figure out a little bit of that arc length right over there?" So let's say you have a little bit of that arc length that... I'm going to zoom in on that. Well you have a little bit of a small change in x over that arc length that I've blown up, so call that dx, and you have a small change in y as well, dy, and we know from the Pythagorean theorem, if we get small enough you can approximate this as just the hypotenuse as this is the base, this is the height, and this is the hypotenuse. And so this is going to be, especially if you get these small enough, a line is going to be a pretty - you could really approximate this arc by the hypotenuse right over here. We know what this is from the Pythagorean theorem. This is going to be the square root of dx squared plus dy squared, straight up from the Pythagorean theorem. Now, how do we write these as functions of t? Well we know that dx/dt is equal to x'(t) or if we treat differentials kind of like numbers, and you can most of the time, this is not very rigorous, but you that that dx is equal to x'(t) dt and we know that dy of t or dy/dt, we know this is the same thing at the derivative of y with respect to t; y'(t) multiply both sides by dt you get dy = y'(t) dt. And all I'm doing here is essentially reproving or re-deriving the arc length formula. So we know that this right over here is just a small little arc length so we could call that dL or da for small arc length. Or actually we don't have to worry about what we call that right now. But this expression for that very little small arc length right over there; if I rewrite it in terms of this and this, what I have on the right-hand side, and I want to do that so that I can get everything in terms of t, I get it is equal to the square root of dx squared... Well dx squared is the same thing as (I'll do it in that magenta color) x'(t) dt squared and then you have plus dy squared, and dy squared is just this stuff: y'(t) dt squared. And so this little arc length is this right over here, and then you can actually factor out a dt squared, so this is going to be equal to dt squared times x'(t) squared plus (I'll do this in green) y'(t) squared. And then of course you can factor out the dt out of the radical sign now. The square root of dt squared is just dt so all of this simplifies to (I'll write it in yellow) this part right over here is x'(t) squared and this part right over here is y'(t) squared, and then we factor out the dt. Now this is all just a way to derive what this little small d-arc or this little small arc length is but we don't want to find just a small arc length, we want to sum over all of them, so what we want to do is integrate the dt's, take the infinite sum of these infinitely small pieces right over here, these infinitely small arc lengths from t = 0 to t = 3. And so now we just do it. And so they tell us what x'(t) is and y'(t) is. Let me just rewrite the expression. This is going to be equal to the integral from 0 to 3 of the square root of x'(t) squared; the problem they give us what x'(t) is, its 4t + 1. So its 4t + 1 squared plus y'(t) squared... the derivative of y with respect to t is sine of t squared and we need to square that as well and then dt. And this is not a simple thing to find the antiderivative of, but lucky for us we are allowed to use our calculators in this part of the AP exam. And so all you have to do at this point, we've already done really the hard work, is use this definite integral function. It's in our catalog right over here and you can go straight to the 'f's and go a page down. We need to find the definite integral, we have to punch this into our calculator, of the square root of, (and I'll write it as x's just because the x button is much easier to get to than trying to put a variable t in there), so the square root of 4x plus 1 squared plus sine of x squared (instead of writing a t here, I'm just writing an x here, just to clarify what I'm doing) and then we want to square that, let's see, that closes that parentheses, and then I need to close the radical parentheses right over there. I want to say that my variable of integration is x I could have put t's here and set up my variable of integration as t, there's not any difference there and then I'm going between 0 and 3. And so, let's let the calculator do all the work here and we get... its taking a little time. We get 21.091. So this is equal to 21.091 and that's the entire arc length. That's the distance that this particle traveled. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #3a | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Problem three. Let f of x is equal
to e to the 2x. Let R be the region in
the first quadrant bounded by the graph of f,
the coordinate axes, and the vertical
line, x is equal to k. So they drew that
right over here. And it's in the figure
above in the actual AP exam. But I put it below
here so I didn't have to waste the screen
real estate above that. And you see right here,
this is our f of x, this is the line
x is equal to k, and this region R
is between those, and it's in the first
quadrant right over here. So this right over
here is our region R. So what are they
asking us to do? So k is greater
than 0, the region R shown the figure above. And this is the figure. Part a. Write, but do not evaluate
an expression involving an integral that gives the
perimeter of R in terms of k. So for the perimeter
of R, we're going to have to find the
length of the sides of R, and the hardest of
these is to find the length of the actual
curve between this point and this point right over here. And I like to always rederive
the arc length formula, although if you're about
to take the AP exam, it probably doesn't hurt
to have it memorized just so you could save some time. But you should
always know how it's derived so that when
you're 35 years old and you don't have a
calculus book as a reference, you can come up
with it yourself. And so you know where
the formula comes from. So let's rederive it. So let's say we were to zoom
in on a little bit of the curve right over there. So let's say let's zoom in
on that part of the curve right over there. And what we could do is,
same way we derived an arc length when the function
was defined parametrically, which we did, I think, in
part one of this AP exam. This time it's not
defined parametrically, so we can do it in
terms of just x and y. So if you viewed this
distance right over here, this is going to be a
very small change in x. Let's call that dx. And then this right
over here is going to be a very small
change in y, dy. And we know that dy, the
derivative of y with respect to x, or dy/dx, this is
equal to f prime of x. Or we could say that if we
multiply both sides by dx, we know that dy is equal
to f prime of x dx. So this is equal
to f prime of x dx. And then for a very small change
in x and very small change in y, we can approximate
this curve length with the Pythagorean theorem. And if we get small enough,
it'll probably directly kind of measure
that curve length. So we use the Pythagorean
theorem right here. This length is going to be
the square root of dx squared plus dy squared. And if we write dy this
way, that arc length right over here, this
little small arc length, is going to be equal
to, right over here, the square root of dx squared
plus this is dy so plus f prime of x
squared times dx squared. All I did is I squared
this. dy squared is this thing right over here. And let me expand the
radical sign a little bit. And just the same
exact way we did it when we had the function
defined parametrically, we can factor out
a dx squared here. So this is going to be equal
to the square root of if you factor out a dx squared
of this, you get a 1. You factor out a dx
squared out of this part, plus f prime of x squared. And we factor a dx squared
out of the radical sign, it just becomes a dx. And so that would be the length
of this little small arc here, and it wouldn't
even be this big. It would be a super
infinitesimally small piece of arc. We could call it d
arc right over there. And essentially want to sum up
all of these little segments. So we want to sum them up from x
is equal to 0, all the way to x is equal to k, because we're
integrating with respect to x right over here. So this arc length
right over here so let me write what they
want us to figure out; we're trying to figure
out the perimeter of R is equal to first, this part. So this is the integral
from 0 to k. x is equal to 0 to x is equal to k of the
square root of 1 plus and f prime of x. f of x is e to the 2x. So f prime of x is equal to the
derivative of this with respect to x, which is 2e to the 2x. The derivative of 2x is 2. Derivative of e to the 2x with
respect to 2x is e to the 2x. So 2e to the 2x, we
want to square that, because this is f
prime of x, but we want to square f prime of x. So that's 4e to the 4x. And of course, we have a dx. So this is the length of the
arc, and that's the hard part. And now we just have to get
the rest of the perimeter. So you have this little
segment right over here. That's length 1. We're going from
1 to 0 or 0 to 1. So plus 1. Then you have this part
right along the x-axis. Well, that's going
to be of length k. Plus k. And then finally, you have
this height right over here. And that's going to be of length
of f of k, or e to the 2k. Plus e to the 2k. And we're done. We found the perimeter of R, and
we don't have to evaluate it. So we're done with this part. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #3 (b & c) | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
We're on part b. The region R is rotated about
the x-axis to form a solid. Find the volume, V, of
the solid in terms of k. So this is our
region R, and it's going to be rotated
around the x-axis. It's going to be rotated around
the x-axis to form a solid. So that solid is going to
look something like this. It's going to look like this. This is going to be
this end of the solid when it's rotated
around, and it's going to look
something like this. Let me do my best attempt
to draw our solid. And then that side is going
to look something like that. It'll look a little
bit like a loudspeaker. And so let me shade
it in a little bit. So that's going to
be our solid and you can imagine that maybe this
right over here is our y-axis. That is our y-axis. And then going straight through
the center of the solid, you have your x-axis. If the solid was
slightly transparent, you would see the other side of
this opening right over here, and the x-axis goes
straight through the center. So how do we find the
volume of this solid? Well, we could think about
each of the individual disks of this solid right over here. So think about it this way. Let's take a disk
right over here. Let me take this
disk right over here so that you can imagine this
little bit of a cross section. It's a little bit of a
cross section of this solid. So this disk right
over here, it's going to have some area,
some surface area, and then it's going to have some depth. I'll draw the edge. You can imagine
the depth is kind of the edge of the quarter,
while the surface area is kind of the face of the
quarter, the area of the face of the quarter. So what's going to be the
volume of this white disk right over here? Well, it's going
to be the surface area of the disk
times the depth. So what is the surface area? Well, surface area of a circle
is pi times the radius squared. So it's going to be pi times
and what's this radius? Well, the radius is the
height between the x-axis and the function. So this radius is
e to the 2x power. So the area of each
of these disks, for this x right over
here, for this value of x, is going to be pi times
e to the 2x squared. And then if we want the
volume of this entire disk, we then multiply the
area times the depth. So times dx. So this would be the volume
of this little disk over here that has a very small
infinitesimally wide depth. What we want to do is
sum all of these disks. We want to have a
bunch of these disks, that we want to
sum up all of them. So we want to take
an infinite sum of these infinitely thin disks. So essentially we're just going
to take the sum of all of these from x is equal to 0, all
the way to x is equal to k. Right, because this
right over here, this is x is equal to k,
this is x is equal to 0, we take the sum
of all the disks. We will get our actual volume. So we can actually evaluate
this integral analytically, it's not too bad. Because either
let me rewrite it. Pi times e to the 2x squared
is e to the 4x, just 2x times 2. And then, if we want
to take the integral, you might be able to do
this just by inspection, but if you want
to say, hey look, I have a little
function here, I want its derivative sitting
here, what we can do is we can multiply
this expression by 4, and we can also divide it by 4. If you multiply something
by 4 and divide by 4, you haven't changed its value. You've multiplied it by 1. But what this does
is it gives us let me rewrite it a little bit. We can rewrite this as pi
over 4 times 4e to the 4x. I just rewrote this. I multiplied and divided by 4,
multiplied and divided by 4. And the reason why I
did that is so that we have the derivative of 4x
sitting right over here, we have this 4. Pi over 4 is a constant, so
we can actually take it out of the integral. And so we can say that this
expression right over here is the same as this
expression right over here, from pi over 4 times the
integral from 0 to k of 4e to the 4x dx. And so the whole reason why
I multiplied and divided by 4 is I have something here,
I have its derivative. So I can really just pretend
like this is an e to the x and you can take the integral,
or the anti-derivative, with respect to 4x. So the inside is e to the 4x. And you can verify. If you take the
derivative of e to the 4x, it is the derivative of 4x,
which is 4, times e to the 4x. So this right here is the
anti-derivative of that. And we're going to evaluate it. We are going to
evaluate it from 0 to k. All of that times pi over 4. And so when you evaluate
it at k, it's e to the 4k. So this is going to be pi
over 4 times e to the 4k minus e to the 4 times 0, which is
e to the 0, which is minus 1. So this is our volume, pi over
4 times e to the 4k minus 1. So that is part b. We did that. Now part c. I think we have time for this. The volume, V, found in part
b, changes as k changes. If dk, the derivative of k
with respect to t is 1/3, determine the derivative
of V with respect to t when k is equal to 1/2. So this is straight up
from the chain rule. So the chain rule will tell us
and if you view differentials as just very, very
small numbers, it actually seems like a
little bit of common sense the rate of change of V,
so a very small change in V with respect to a
very small change in t is equal to a very small
change in V with respect to a very small change in k
times a very small change in k divided by a very
small change in t. Or the derivative of
V with respect to t is equal to the derivative
of V with respect to k times the derivative of k
with respect to t. And the reason why I
said this makes sense if you view a differential as
a small number is you would and that's not a very
rigorous way of doing it, but it's a good kind of common
sense way of just thinking about things is that
these guys would cancel out if these were
numbers, and then you would have dV dt on both sides. So that's why I said that
this is slightly common sense. You can kind of
view it that way. But this essentially gives us
everything we need to know. We need to solve for dV dt. They already gave us dk dt at
1/3 when k is equal to 1/2. So they're already
telling us the rate of change of k
with respect to t. We already know that this
thing right over here is going to be 1/3. And we can figure out the
derivative of V with respect to k very easily because we
have V as a function of k right over here. So let's figure that out. So the derivative of
V with respect to k is equal to pi over 4 times
the derivative in here. And the derivative of
this is just 4e to the 4k. The derivative of
negative 1 is just 0. So this is times 4e to
the 4k, is the derivative. These guys cancel out. So it's equal to pi
e to the 4k, that's the derivative of V
with respect to k. We want to find it
when k is equal to 1/2, so we could write
V prime at 1/2, or when k is equal to 1/2 dV dk. dV dk is going to be equal to
pi times e to the 4 times 1/2 which is equal to pi e squared. So this part right over
here is pi e squared. And so the derivative
of V with respect to t when k is equal to
1/2 and the derivative of k with respect to t is
1/3 is going to be just pi e squared times 1/3. So let me just
rewrite it over here. So dV dt is going to be
equal to 1/3 times this, or we could write
pi e squared over 3. And we're done. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #6a | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Problem number six. Let f of x is equal to sine
of x squared plus cosine of x. The graph of y is equal
to the absolute value of the fifth derivative
of f at x is shown above. And I haven't shown it here
just so we have some space. I'll show it when
we need to show it. I think we have to
show it in part D. So first, let's do
part A right over here. Write the first non-zero
terms for the Taylor series for sine of x about
x is equal to 0. And write the first for non-zero
terms of the Taylor series for sine of x squared
about x equals 0. So let's do this first part. And just a reminder,
a Taylor Series is a polynomial
approximation of a function. So just to give us
a quick reminder. We go into much
more detail in this on the videos about
Taylor series. But if you have a function
that looks like this, and if you wanted to approximate
it with a Taylor series around 0, if you only have one
term in your Taylor series, you would just
literally have it it would just be a
constant, just like that. If you have two terms
in your Taylor series it would be a line
that looks like that. If you have three terms
in your Taylor series, you'd get to a
second degree term. And you'd start approximating
it something like that. If you get to the
third degree term it might start
looking like that. And as you add more
and more terms, you get a better, better
approximation of your function. And if you add an
infinite number, it might actually
converge to your function. So let's just remind
ourselves, if I have a function if I have f
of x, this Taylor series I can approximate it with
this Taylor series. And if we want to center
that approximation around 0, it'll be equal to f of
0 plus f prime of 0. The derivative at 0 times x
plus the second derivative at 0 times x squared
over 2 factorial. You could have divided
this term right here by one factorial,
which is just 1. Two factorials is just 2. And then plus the third
derivative of f at 0 times x to the third
over 3 factorial. Plus the fourth derivative I
think you get the idea here at the fourth
derivative at 0 times x to the fourth
divided by 4 factorial, and so on and so forth. So what they want us to
do is find the first four non-zero terms of the
Taylor series for sine of x. And some of you might
already know this. We actually cover
this in the video where we show Euler's identity. But we'll do it again
right over here. So if we just
take I'll call it g of x, because they already
defined f of x up here. So let's say that g of x
let me do this in a new color just to ease the monotony. Let's say that g of x
is equal to sine of x. Then we know that g of 0
is going to be equal to 0. And then if we take
the derivative, g prime of x is going to be
equal to negative no, it's going to be positive
cosine of x. g prime of 0 is now
going to be equal to 1. Cosine of 0 is 1. Then if you take the
second derivative, the derivative of cosine
of x is negative sine of x. Negative sine of x and
the second derivative at 0 once again is going to
equal zero, sine of 0, 0. And now let's take
the third derivative. Third derivative of
our function of g. The derivative of negative sine
of x is negative cosine of x. And the third
derivative at 0 is now going to be equal to negative 1. And we could keep going. You can already guess
where this might lead to, but I'll just keep
going just in case. The fourth derivative
is once again going to be equal to sine of x. It is now going to be
equal to sine of x. And then the fourth
derivative at 0, because it's the same
thing as the function, is now going to be 0 as well. So this is going to be equal
to g to the fourth at 0. And then we could keep going. This is going to be the same
thing as g to the fifth, because we start cycling as we
take more and more derivatives. So this is going to
be the same thing as the fifth derivative at 0. This is going to
be the same thing as the sixth derivative at 0. And this is going
to be the same. This is an equal sign
right here, equals 1. And this is going
to be the same thing as the seventh derivative at 0. So if you want the first
four non-zero terms, let's just work through it. So first of all, f of 0
I'll do this in a new color. If we want to
approximate g of x, if we want to
approximate sine of x. So we'll say sine of x is going
to be approximately equal to. So this first term right
over here, that is sine of 0. That's g of 0. That's going to be 0, so we
don't even have to write it. Then we go to this
term right over here. Well, the first derivative, f
prime of 0 or in this case, g prime of 0 is
going to be equal to 1. So it's going to be 1 times x. So you're going to
have an x there. Then the next term
is going to be 0. We see that right over there. Because the second derivative
of our function evaluated at 0 is 0. Our third derivative of our
function evaluated at 0 is 1. So that term is going
to show up again. Actually, that
term is negative 1. I don't want to
make a mistake here. That is negative 1, negative 1. It was negative cosine of x. You evaluate negative cosine
of x and 0, you get negative 1 right over here. So the third derivative,
this thing right over here, is negative 1. So then we have minus x to
the third over 3 factorial. The fourth derivative,
once again, is 0. The fifth derivative
evaluated at 0 is 1. So then you're going
to have plus 1 times x to the fifth over 5 factorial. Then the six derivative is 0. So that term is
going to disappear. I didn't even write it up here. And then the seventh term,
the coefficient is negative 1. Or the seventh derivative
evaluated at 0 is negative 1. So you have negative 1 times
x to the seventh over 7 factorial. And we have to go all the
way to the seven degree term to find the first four non-zero
terms for our Taylor Series. And so we're done with
at least the first part. We found the first four
non-zero terms of sine of x Now, what about sine of x squared? We have to be careful here. Because you might just say, OK,
let me just apply this formula. And what you're going
to find very quickly is when you start taking the
second and third derivatives of this thing right over here,
it's going to get really messy. But what you can say
is, look, sine of x is approximately this
thing right over here. What happens if I just replace
the x with the x squared? Then I get sine of x
squared is approximately equal to instead of an x here,
I'm going to put an x squared. Instead of an x
to the third here, I'm going to put an x
squared to the third over here, over 3 factorial. Instead of an x to the fifth. I can put an x squared to the
fifth power over 5 factorial. And instead of an
x to the seventh I could write x squared to the
seventh power over 7 factorial. So this is a very
important thing to realize. Because if you had
started directly take the Taylor Series around
0 of this thing right here, you would have taken
up all your time trying to take the derivatives. And you probably wouldn't have
been able to do it anyway, because it would have
gotten really messy. And the key here is just to
realize that you substitute x squared for x,
you're then going to get the approximation
for sine of x squared. We could simplify
this a little bit. This is going to
be approximately equal to x squared minus
x to the sixth over 3 factorial plus x
to the 10th over 5 factorial minus x to the
14th over 7 factorial. So that's our second
part of the problem. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #6b | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
We're on part b. Write the first four non-zero
terms of the Taylor series for cosine of x
about x equals 0. Use this series and the
series for sine of x squared, found in part A, to write
the first four non-zero terms of the Taylor series
for f so, for this f right over here
about x equals 0. So let's just do the first part. Let's find the first four
non-zero terms of the Taylor series for cosine of
x about x equals 0. So let's just say well, we'll
put our formula for the Taylor series up here around
x is equal to 0. So we're centering it around
x equals 0 right over here. And so if we say that h of x
is equal to cosine of x, then h of 0, is going to
be equal to cosine of 0, which is equal to 1. And then, if you
have h prime of x, that's going to be equal
to negative sine of x. And you could look over here. This is essentially h of x. And this is going
to be h prime of x. So it's essentially
one step ahead of where we were with g of x. Well, we'll just redo it
over here just so it's clear. So the first derivative
at 0 is negative sine of 0, which is just 0. And then you have the
second derivative of h of x. So the derivative of
sine of x is cosine of x. But we have that
negative out front, so it's negative cosine of x. So h prime prime of 0 is going
to be equal to cosine of 0 is 1. You have that
negative out front. So it's negative 1. And then you have the
third derivative of h is equal to derivative
of negative cosine of x is positive sine of x. So the third derivative at
0 is going to be equal to 0. And then you take the
derivative of this, you're going to get
cosine of x again. So then the cycle starts again. So I could write, this is also
equal to the fourth derivative at 0. Right, you take let me just
make it clear what I'm saying. If I take the derivative
of this, I get cosine of x. The fourth derivative of
h is cosine of x again. So the fourth
derivative at 0 is going to be the same thing as the
function evaluated at 0, which is 1. And so the fifth derivative
at 0 is going to be 0. The sixth derivative at 0
is going to be negative 1. And then the seventh
the derivative at 0 is going to be 0. So that's enough, now. I think we definitely
have four non-zero terms. We have this term let me
pick a nice color here we have this term, because
we have a 1 coefficient. This is going to be a 0 because
we have a 0 coefficient. This is a non-zero term. Then this is a non-zero term
because we have the 1 again. And then this is a non-zero term
because we have the negative 1. So we could say that cosine
of x is approximately equal to because we're
just approximating it with the first four
non-zero terms. So f of 0 is 1. So that's this term
right over here. Instead of f of x,
we're calling it h of x right here, so
that we don't get confused with that original f
defined in the problem, and that we're going to
work on in the second part of this section of the problem. So cosine of x is equal to 1. h prime of 0 is 0, so
there's no term there. Then f prime prime of 0, second
derivative, it's negative 1. So it's negative x
squared over 2 factorial. And then you get another 0
for the third degree term. Then you get a 1 for
the fourth degree term. So plus 1. But we don't have to write
the 1, it's implicitly there. Plus 1 times x to the
4th over 4 factorial. And then the next non-zero term
is this negative 1 over here. So minus 1 we can
just write minus and that's the
sixth degree term. So x to the sixth
over 6 factorial. And we're done. Those are the first four
non-zero terms of cosine of x. Now let's do the second
part of the problem. So we did this first part. Use this series and the
series for sine of x squared, which we found right over
here, sine of x squared actually, I think
we wrote it, this is the series for sine of x
squared when we simplified it. Use those that was
found in part A to write the first four non-zero
terms of the Taylor series for f about x equals 0. So where's our function again? So our function is sine of
x squared plus cosine of x. Let me rewrite that. So f of x is equal to sine of
x squared plus cosine of x. So let's write the first
four non-zero terms. And you want to start
with the lowest degree. So you could say
that f of x is going to be approximately equal
to because we're just approximating it with this
polynomial right over here. So, from cosine of x so
you have this right over here is cosine of x. And sine of x is over there. So between both of these,
the lowest degree term right over here is this 1. So I'll write this 1 over here. And then after that, the next
lowest in either of these, we have no first degree terms. We have no x terms. But then, in both of these,
we have an x squared term. Actually, let me write it this
way to simplify what I'm doing. Let me just write them out. So sine of x squared let
me do this in a new color. Sine of x squared is this thing. This is what we
figured out in part A. So that is x squared minus
x to the sixth over 3 factorial I'm going to
just write the whole thing, and then later we'll pick
out the first four terms plus x to the 10th over 5
factorial minus x to the 14th over 7 factorial. So that's the first
four terms of that. So this isn't exactly that. That's approximately
equal to that. So approximation. And then cosine of x,
we just figured out, is plus 1 minus x squared
over 2 factorial plus x to the 4th over 4 factorial
minus x to the 6th over 6 factorial. Now we can pick out the
first four non-zero terms. And since we're assuming
this is a Taylor series, the first term is going
to be the lowest degree, then we're going to keep
going at higher degree terms. So the lowest degree
term right over here. So once again, f of x is going
to be approximately equal to. The lowest degree term
over here is this 1. So let's write the 1 over here. And then, we don't have
any first degree terms. We don't how many just x
to the firsts over here. But we have a couple
of x squareds. So that will actually
be the next term, because we can add
those x squareds. So this right over here,
you have x squared so let me just write it this way. So plus this x squared minus
x squared over 2 factorial. And x squared over 2 factorial
is just x squared over 2. So minus, I could
write 1/2 x squared. And I'll simplify
this in the next step. That's just going to be
one term, because this is going to end up
being 1/2 x squared. All right. Do we have any third
degree terms here? We do not have any
third degree terms. Do we have any fourth
degree terms here? We do. We have this character
right over here. It's a fourth degree term. So plus x to the 4th
over 4 factorial. And then finally, do we
have any 5th degree terms? We don't have any 5th
degree terms, no x to the 5ths over here. Do we have any 6th degree terms? We do. We have this one and this one. So this is going to be minus
there's a negative sign out in front of both of them. So it's going to be minus x
to the 6th over 3 factorial plus x to the 6th
over 6 factorial. You could say it's minus x
to the 6th over 3 factorial, and then you could distribute
the negative sign if you want. I just factored it out. And now we can just simplify
this thing right over here. So this is going to be equal
to so f of x is approximately equal to 1 plus and then,
if you have an x squared minus half of an x squared,
you're going to have 1/2 x squared. Or I could just write x squared
over 2, plus x squared over 2. And then you have, in that blue
color, plus x to the 4th over 4 factorial. And then, to simplify this,
3 factorial 6 factorial. So this 6 factorial
is the same thing, just to make
everything clear to us. 6 factorial is the same thing
as 3 factorial times 4 times 5 times 6, or 3
factorial times 120. And so what we can do is
multiply the numerator and the denominator here by
4 times 5 times 6, or by 120. So let me just rewrite this. So I'll do this
over here because I want this to be my final answer. So if I have x to the
sixth over 3 factorial, I can multiply the
denominator by 4 times 5 times 6, and then multiply the
numerator times 4 times 5 times 6, which is the same thing
as multiplying it times 120. So you have 120 up there. 4 times 5 times 6 is also 120. And now we have the
same denominator, because this is the same
thing as 6 factorial. So you have 120 x to
the 6 over 6 factorial plus x to the 6th over 6
factorial gives you 121 x to the sixth over 6 factorial. And we have this
negative sign out here. So it becomes negative 121 x
to the sixth over 6 factorial. And we're done. We've figured out the first four
non-zero terms of our f of x. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #6c | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Part C. Find the value
of the sixth derivative of f evaluated at 0. So you could imagine
if you just tried to find the sixth derivative of
f, that would take you forever. And then to evaluate it at 0,
because this is x squared here. And you'd have to keep doing
the product rule over and over again, and the chain
rule and all the rest. It would become very,
very, very messy. But we have a big clue here. The fact that they made
us find the first four terms of the Taylor series
of f about x equals 0 tells us that there
might be a simpler way to do this, as
opposed to just taking the sixth derivative of
this and evaluating at 0. The simplest way to do
this is to just go back. In the last problem,
we were able to come up with the first four
non-zero terms of the Taylor series of f. And if you look at your
definition of the Taylor series right here and we go into
depth on this in another Khan Academy video where we talk
about why this makes sense you see that each degree
term of the Taylor series, its coefficient
is that derivative. And this Taylor Series
is centered around 0, and that's what we care about
in terms of this problem. We see the coefficient is
that derivative divided by that degrees, that
derivative evaluated at 0 divided by that
degrees factorials. So the second degree term,
it's the second derivative of f evaluated at 0
divided by 2 factorial. The fourth degree term
is the fourth derivative of f evaluated at 0
divided by 4 factorial. So the sixth degree term
let's remind ourselves what we're even
trying to figure out so they want us to figure
out the sixth derivative of f evaluated at 0. That's what they want
us to figure out. Well, if you think about
the Taylor series centered at 0, or at 0, or
approximated around 0, the sixth degree term in the
Taylor series approximation of f is going to be f prime
of the sixth derivative of f evaluated at 0 times x to
the sixth over 6 factorial. This is going to
be the sixth degree term in Taylor approximation,
in Taylor series. And we have that term
sitting right over here. This is the sixth degree term. We figured it out
in the last problem. This right here is
the sixth degree term. So you have x to the sixth over
here, x to the sixth over here, you have 6 factorial over
here, 6 factorial over here. So this negative 121 must
be the sixth derivative of f evaluated at 0. So that's our answer. This is equal to negative 121. And we're done. 

Transcript for: Taylor polynomial remainder (part 1) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
- [Voiceover] Let's say
that we have some function f of x right over here. And let me graph an arbitrary f of x. So, that's my y-axis, that is my x-axis and maybe f of x looks
something like that. And what I wanna do is I
wanna approximate f of x with a Taylor polynomial centered around x is equal to a. So this is the x-axis, this is the y-axis. So I want a Taylor polynomial
centered around there. And we've seen how this works. The Taylor polynomial
comes out of the idea that for all of the derivatives up to and including the degree
of the polynomial, those derivatives of that
polynomial evaluated at a should be equal to the derivatives of our function evaluated at a. And that polynomial evaluated at a should also be equal to that
function evaluated at a. So our polynomial, our Taylor polynomial approximation would look
something like this. So, I'll call it P of x. And sometimes you might see
a subscript, a big N there to say it's an Nth degree approximation and sometimes you'll
see something like this. Sometimes you'll see
something like N comma a to say it's an Nth degree
approximation centered at a. Actually, I'll write that right now. Maybe we might lose it if
we have to keep writing it over and over but you
should assume that it is an Nth degree polynomial centered at a. And it's going to look like this. It is going to be f of a, plus f prime of a, times x minus a, plus f prime prime of a, times x minus a squared over Either you could write
two or two factorial, they're the same value. I'll write two factorial. You could write a divided by one factorial over here, if you like. And then plus, you go to the
third derivative of f at a times x minus a to the third power, I think you see where this is going, over three factorial. And you keep going, I'll
go to this line right here, all the way to your Nth degree term which is the Nth derivative of f evaluated at a times x minus a to the N over N factorial. And this polynomial right over here, this Nth degree polynomial centered at a, f or P of a is going to be
the same thing as f of a. And you can verify that
because all of these other terms have an x minus a here. So if you put an a in the polynomial, all of these other terms
are going to be zero. And you'll have P of a is equal to f of a. Let me write that down. P of a is equal to f of a. And so it might look something like this. And it's going to fit the curve better the more of these terms
that we actually have. So it might look something like this. I'll try my best to show what it might look like. So this is all review,
I have this polynomial that's approximating this function. The more terms I have, the
higher degree of this polynomial, the better that it will fit this curve the further that I get away from a. But what I wanna do in
this video is think about if we can bound how good it's fitting this function as we move away from a. So what I wanna do is
define a remainder function. Or sometimes, I've seen some text books call it an error function. And I'm going to call this I'll just call it an error Just so you're consistent with all the different notations you
might see in a book, some people will call
this a remainder function and sometimes they'll
write a remainder function for an Nth degree
polynomial centered at a. Sometimes you'll see this
as an error function. The error function is sometimes avoided because it looks like expected
value from probability. But you'll see this often,
this is E for error. E for error, R for remainder. And sometimes they'll also have the subscripts over there like that. And what we'll do is, we'll just define this function to be the difference between f of x and our approximation
of f of x for any given x. So it's really just going to be, I'll do it in the same colors,
it's going to be f of x minus P of x. Where this is an Nth degree polynomial centered at a. So for example, if
someone were to ask you, or if you wanted to visualize. What are they talking
about if they're saying the error of this Nth degree
polynomial centered at a when we are at x is equal to b. What is thing equal to or how
should you think about this. Well, if b is right over here. So the error of b is going to be f of b minus the polynomial at b. So f of b there, the
polynomial's right over there. So it'll be this distance right over here. So if you measure the error at a, it would actually be zero. Because the polynomial and the
function are the same there. F of a is equal to P of a, so the error at a is equal to zero. And let me actually write that down because that's an interesting property. It'll help us bound it
eventually so let me write that. The error function at a. And for the rest of this
video you can assume that I could write a subscript. This is for the Nth degree
polynomial centered at a. I'm just gonna not write that everytime just to save ourselves a
little bit of time in writing, to keep my hand fresh. So the error at a is equal to f of a minus P of a. And once again, I won't
write the sub-N, sub-a. You can assume it, this is an Nth degree polynomial centered at a. And these two things
are equal to each other. So this is going to be equal to zero. And we see that right over here. The distance between the
two functions is zero there. Now let's think about something else. Let's think about what the derivative of the error function evaluated at a is. Well that's going to be the
derivative of our function at a minus the first derivative of our polynomial at a. And if we assume that this is higher than degree one, we
know that these derivates are going to be the same at a. You can try to take the
first derivative here. If you take the first
derivative of this whole mess And this is actually why Taylor
polynomials are so useful, is that up to and including
the degree of the polynomial when you evaluate the derivatives
of your polynomial at a they're going to be the same as the derivatives of the function at a. And that's what starts to
make it a good approximation. But if you took a derivative here, this term right here will
disappear, it'll go to zero. I'll cross it out for now. This term right over here
will just be f prime of a and then all of these other
terms are going to be left with some type of an x minus a in them. And so when you evaluate it at a, all the terms with an x minus a disappear, because you have an a minus a on them. This one already disappeared and you're literally just left with P prime of a will equal f prime of a. And we've seen that before.
So let me write that. So because we know that P prime of a is equal to f prime of a, when you evaluate the error function, the derivative of the error function at a, that also is going to be equal to zero. And this general property right over here, is true up to an including N. So let me write this down. So we already know that P
of a is equal to f of a. We already know that P prime
of a is equal to f prime of a. This really comes straight
out of the definition of the Taylor polynomials. And this is going to be true all the way until the Nth derivative
of our polynomial is going, evaluated at a, not everywhere,
just evaluated at a, is going to be equal to the Nth derivative of our function evaluated at a. So what that tells us is
that we can keep doing this with the error function all
the way to the Nth derivative of the error function evaluated at a is going to be equal to, well that's just going
to be the Nth derivative of f evaluated at a,
minus the Nth derivative of our polynomial evaluated at a. And we already said that
these are going to be equal to each other up
to the Nth derivative when we evaluate them at a. So these are all going
to be equal to zero. So this is an interesting property and it's also going to
be useful when we start to try to bound this error function. And that's the whole
point of where I'm going with this video and
probably the next video, is we're gonna try to bound it so we know how good of an estimate we have. Especially as we go further and further from where we are centered. >From where are approximation is centered. Now let's think about when we
take a derivative beyond that. So let's think about what
happens when we take the N plus oneth derivative. What's a good place to write? Well I have some screen
real estate right over here. What is the N plus oneth derivative of our error function? And not even if I'm just evaluating at a. If I just say generally,
the error function E of x, what's the N plus oneth derivative of it? Well it's going to be the
N plus oneth derivative of our function minus the N plus oneth derivative of our We're not just evaluating
at a here either. Let me write a x there. I'm literally just taking
the N plus oneth derivative of both sides of this
equation right over here. So it's literally the
N plus oneth derivative of our function minus the
N plus oneth derivative of our Nth degree polynomial. The N plus oneth derivative
of our Nth degree polynomial. I could write a N here,
I could write an a here to show it's an Nth degree centered at a. Now, what is the N plus onethe derivative of an Nth degree polynomial? And if you want some hints, take the second derivative
of y is equal to x. It's a first degree polynomial,
take the second derivative, you're gonna get zero. Take the third derivative
of y is equal to x squared. The first derivative is 2x,
the second derivative is 2, the third derivative is zero. In general, if you take
an N plus oneth derivative of an Nth degree polynomial, and you could prove it for yourself, you could even prove it generally but I think it might make
a little sense to you, it's going to be equal to zero. It is going to be equal to zero. So this thing right here, this
is an N plus oneth derivative of an Nth degree polynomial. This is going to be equal to zero. Let me write this over here. The N plus oneth derivative
of our error function or our remainder function,
we could call it, is equal to the N plus oneth derivative of our function. And so, what we could do now and we'll probably have to
continue this in the next video, is figure out, at least can we bound this? Can we bound this and if
we are able to bound this, if we're able to figure out an upper bound on its magnitude So actually, what we want to do is, we wanna bound its overall magnitude. We wanna bound its absolute value. If we can determine that it is less than or equal to some value M, so if we can actually bound it, maybe we can do a little bit of calculus, we could keep integrating it and maybe we can go back
to the original function and bound that in some way. If we do know some type of
bound like this over here. So I'll take that up in the next video. 

Transcript for: Taylor polynomial remainder (part 2) | Series | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
In the last video, we started to explore
the notion of an error function. Not to be confused with the expected value because it really does reflect the same
notation. But here E is for error. And we could also thought it will some times here referred to as Reminder
function. And we saw it's really just the difference
as we, the difference between the function and
our approximation of the function. So for example, this, this distance right
over here, that is our error. That is our error at the x is equal to b. And what we really care about is the
absolute value of it. Because at some points f of x might be
larger than the polynomial. Sometimes the polynomial might be larger
than f of x. What we care is the absolute distance
between them. And so what I want to do in this video is try to bound, try to bound our error at
some b. Try to bound our error. So say it's less than or equal to some
constant value. Try to bound it at b for some b is greater
than a. We're just going to assume that b is
greater than a. And we saw some tantalizing, we, we got to
a bit of a tantalizing result that seems like we might be able to
bound it in the last video. We saw that the n plus 1th derivative of
our error function is equal to the n plus 1th
derivative of our function. Or their absolute values would also be
equal to. So if we could somehow bound the n plus
1th derivative of our function over some interval, an
interval that matters to us. An interval that maybe has b in it. Then, we can, at least bound the n plus
1th derivative our error function. And then, maybe we can do a little bit of integration to bound the error itself at
some value b. So, let's see if we can do that. Well, let's just assume, let's just assume
that we're in a reality where we do know something about the n plus1
derivative of f of x. Let's say we do know that this. We do it in a color I that haven't used
yet. Well, I'll do it in white. So let's say that that thing over there
looks something like that. So that is f the n plus 1th derivative. The n plus 1th derivative. And I only care about it over this
interval right over here. Who cares what it does later, I just gotta
bound it over the interval cuz at the end of the day I just wanna
balance b right over there. So let's say that the absolute value of
this. Let's say that we know. Let me write it over here, let's say that
we know. We know that the absolute value of the n
plus 1th derivative, the n plus 1th. And, I apologize I actually switch between
the capital N and the lower-case n and I did that in the
last video. I shouldn't have, but now that you know that I did that hopefully it doesn't
confuse it. N plus 1th, so let's say we know that the
n plus 1th derivative of f of x, the absolute value
of it, let's say it's bounded. Let's say it's less than or equal to some
m over the interval, cuz we only care about
the interval. It might not be bounded in general, but
all we care is it takes some maximum value over
this interval. So over, over, over the interval x, I
could write it this way, over the interval x is a member between a
and b, so this includes both of them. It's a closed interval, x could be a, x could be b, or x could be anything in
between. And we can say this generally that, that this derivative will have some
maximum value. So this is its, the absolute value,
maximum value, max value, m for max. We know that it will have a maximum value,
if this thing is continuous. So once again we're going to assume that
it is continuous, that it has some maximum value over this
interval right over here. Well this thing, this thing right over
here, we know is the same thing as the n plus 1 derivative of
the error function. So then we know, so then that, that
implies, that implies that, that implies that the, that's a new color,
let me do that in blue, or that green. That implies that the, the, the end plus
one derivative of the error function. The absolute value of it because these are
the same thing is also, is also bounded by m. So that's a little bit of an interesting
result but it gets us no where near there. It might look similar but this is the n
plus 1 derivative of the error function. And, and we'll have to think about how we
can get an m in the future. We're assuming that we some how know it
and maybe we'll do some example problems where we
figure that out. But this is the m plus 1th derivative. We bounded it's absolute value but we really want to bound the actual error
function. The 0 is the derivative, you could say,
the actual function itself. What we could try to integrate both sides
of this and see if we can eventually get to e, to get to e
of x. To get our, to our error function or our
remainder function so let's do that. Let's take the integral, let's take the
integral of both sides of this. Now the integral on this left hand side,
it's a little interesting. We take the integral of the absolute
value. It would be easier if we were taking the
absolute value of the integral. And lucky for us, the way it's set up. So let me just write a little aside here. We know generally that if I take, and it's
something for you to think about. If I take, so if I have two options, if I
have two options, this option versus and I don't
know, they look the same right now. I know they look the same right now. So over here, I'm gonna have the integral
of the absolute value and over here I'm going to have the
absolute value of the interval. Which of these is going to be, which of
these can be larger? Well, you just have to think about the
scenarios. So, if f of x is always positive over the
interval that you're taking the integration, then
they're going to be the same thing. They're, you're gonna get positive values. Take the absolute of a value of a positive
value. It doesn't make a difference. What matters is if f of x is negative. If f of x, if f of x is negative the entire time, so if this our x-axis, that
is our y-axis. If f of x is, well we saw if it's positive
the entire time, you're taking the absolute value of
a positive, absolute value of positive. It's not going to matter. These two things are going to be equal. If f of x is negative the whole time, then
you're going to get, then this integral going to
evaluate to a negative value. But then, you would take the absolute
value of it. And then over here, you're just going to,
this is, the integral going to value to a positive value and it's still
going to be the same thing. The interesting case is when f of x is
both positive and negative, so you can imagine
a situation like this. If f of x looks something like that, then this right over here, the integral, you'd
have positive. This would be positive and then this would
be negative right over here. And so they would cancel each other out. So this would be a smaller value than if you took the integral of the absolute
value. So the integral, the absolute value of f
would look something like this. So all of the areas are going to be, if
you view the integral, if you view this it is definitely going to be a definite
integral. All of the areas, all of the areas would
be positive. So when you it, you are going to get a bigger value when you take the integral of
an absolute value. Then you will, especially when f of x goes both positive and negative over the
interval. Then you would if you took the integral
first and then the absolute value. Cuz once again, if you took the integral
first, for something like this, you'd get a low value cause this
stuff would cancel out. Would cancel out with this stuff right
over here then you'd take the absolute value of just a lower, a
lower magnitude number. And so in general, the integral, the integral, sorry the absolute value of the
integral is going to be less than or equal to the
integral of the absolute value. So we can say, so this right here is the
integral of the absolute value which is going to be
greater than or equal. What we have written over here is just
this. That's going to be greater than or equal
to, and I think you'll see why I'm why I'm doing
this in a second. Greater than or equal to the absolute
value, the absolute value of the integral of, of the n plus
1th derivative. The n plus 1th derivative of, x, dx. And the reason why this is useful, is that
we can still keep the inequality that, this is less
than, or equal to this. But now, this is a pretty straight forward
integral to evaluate. The indo, the anti-derivative of the n
plus 1th derivative, is going to be the nth
derivative. So this business, right over here. Is just going to the absolute value of the
nth derivative. The absolute value of the nth derivative
of our error function. Did I say expected value? I shouldn't. See, it even confuses me. This is the error function. I should've used r, r for remainder. But this all error. The, noth, nothing about probability or
expected value in this video. This is. E for error. So anyway, this is going to be the nth
derivative of our error function, which is going to be less
than or equal to this. Which is less than or equal to the
anti-derivative of M. Well, that's a constant. So that's going to be mx, mx. And since we're just taking indefinite
integrals. We can't forget the idea that we have a
constant over here. And in general, when you're trying to
create an upper bound you want as low of an upper bound as
possible. So we wanna minimize, we wanna minimize
what this constant is. And lucky for us, we do have, we do know
what this, what this function, what value this
function takes on at a point. We know that the nth derivative of our
error function at a is equal to 0. I think we wrote it over here. The nth derivative at a is equal to 0. And that's because the nth derivative of
the function and the approximation at a are going to be the
same exact thing. And so, if we evaluate both sides of this
at a, I'll do that over here on the side, we know
that the absolute value. We know the absolute value of the nth
derivative at a, we know that this thing is going to be equal to
the absolute value of 0. Which is 0. Which needs to be less than or equal to
when you evaluate this thing at a, which is less than or equal to
m a plus c. And so you can, if you look at this part of the inequality, you subtract m a from
both sides. You get negative m a is less than or equal
to c. So our constant here, based on that little
condition that we were able to get in the last
video. Our constant is going to be greater than
or equal to negative ma. So if we want to minimize the constant, if
we wanna get this as low of a bound as possible, we would wanna
pick c is equal to negative Ma. That is the lowest possible c that will meet these constraints that we know are
true. So, we will actually pick c to be negative
Ma. And then we can rewrite this whole thing
as the absolute value of the nth derivative of
the error function. The nth derivative of the error function. Not the expected value. I have a strange suspicion I might have
said expected value. But, this is the error function. The nth der. The absolute value of the nth derivative
of the error function is less than or equal to M times x minus
a. And once again all of the constraints
hold. This is for, this is for x as part of the
interval. The closed interval between, the closed
interval between a and b. But looks like we're making progress. We at least went from the m plus 1
derivative to the n derivative. Lets see if we can keep going. So same general idea. This if we know this then we know that we can take the integral of both sides of
this. So we can take the integral of both sides
of this the anti derivative of both sides. And we know from what we figured out up
here that something's that's even smaller than
this right over here. Is, is the absolute value of the integral
of the expected value. Now [LAUGH] see, I said it. Of the error function, not the expected
value. Of the error function. The nth derivative of the error function
of x. The nth derivative of the error function
of x dx. So we know that this is less than or equal
to based on the exact same logic there. And this is useful because this is just
going to be, this is just going to be the nth minus 1 derivative of
our error function of x. And of course we have the absolute value
outside of it. And now this is going to be less than or
equal to. It's less than or equal to this, which is
less than or equal to this, which is less than or equal to
this right over here. The anti-derivative of this right over
here is going to be M times x minus a squared over 2. You could do U substitution if you want or
you could just say hey look. I have a little expression here, it's
derivative is 1. So it's implicitly there so I can just
treat it as kind of a U. So raise it to an exponent and then divide
that exponent. But once again I'm taking indefinite
integrals. So I'm going to say a plus C over here. But let's use that same exact logic. If we evaluate this at A, you're going to
have it. If you evaluate this while, let's evaluate
both sides of this at A. the left side, evaluated at A, we know, is
going to be zero. We figured that out, all, up here in the
last video. So you get, I'm gonna do it on the right
over here. You get zero, when you valued the left
side of a. The right side of a, if you, the right
side of the value of a you get m times a menus a
square over 2. So you are gonna get 0 plus c, so you are
gonna get, 0 is less or equal to c. Once again we want to minimize our constant, we wanna minimize our upper boundary up
here. So we wanna pick the lowest possible c
that we talk constrains. So the lowest possible c that meets our
constraint is zero. And so the general idea here is that we
can keep doing this, we can keep doing exactly what we're doing all
the way, all the way, all the way until. And so we keep integrating it at the exact
same, same way that I've done it all the way that we get and using
this exact same property here. All the way until we get, the bound on the
error function of x. So you could view this as the 0th
derivative. You know, we're going all the way to the 0th derivative, which is really just the
error function. The bound on the error function of x is
going to be less than or equal to, and what's it
going to be? And you can already see the pattern here. Is that it's going to be m times x, minus
a. And the exponent, the one way to think
about it, this exponent plus this derivative is going to be equal
to n plus 1. Now this derivative is zero so this
exponent is going to be n plus 1. And whatever the exponent is, you're going
to have,a nd maybe I should have done it, you're going to have n plus
one factorial over here. And if say wait why, where does this n
plus 1 factorial come from? I just had a two here. Well think about what happens when we
integrate this again. You're going to raise this to the third
power and then divide by three. So your denominator is going to have two
times three. Then when you integrate it again, you're
going to raise it to the fourth power and then divide by
four. So then your denominator is going to be
two times three times four. Four factorial. So whatever power you're raising to, the denominator is going to be that power
factorial. But what's really interesting now is if we
are able to figure out that maximum value of
our function. If we're able to figure out that maximum
value of our function right there. We now have a way of bounding our error
function over that interval, over that interval
between a and b. So for example, the error function at b. We can now bound it if we know what an m
is. We can say the error function at b is
going to be less than or equal to m times b minus a to the n plus 1th power over n
plus 1 factorial. So that gets us a really powerful, I guess
you could call it, result, kinda the, the math
behind it. And now we can show some examples where
this could actually be applied. 

Transcript for: 2011 Calculus BC free response #6d | AP Calculus BC | Khan Academy
Part D. Let p sub 4 of x
be the fourth degree Taylor polynomial for f
about x equals 0. Using information
from the graph of y is equal to the absolute value
of the fifth derivative of f of x, shown above and that's
the graph right over here, I put it on the side
to save space show that the absolute
value of the difference between the polynomial
the fourth degree polynomial evaluated at 1/4 and the
function evaluated at 1/4 is less than one over 3,000. So this is, it seems like quite
an interesting problem here. So first, let's just think
about what they're asking. They're asking
for the difference between the polynomial and
the function evaluated 1/4. In other words,
they're asking us to they're asking us to
bound the error of the function approximation at
x is equal to 1/4. So let me draw a
little graph here just so we can visualize
it a little better. So if that's our y-axis and
let me draw it like this. So this is our y-axis
and this is our x-axis. And our function, let's
say our function looks something like this. Our polynomial is centered at 0. Our fourth degree
polynomial is centered at 0. And so it'll be equal
to the function at 0. And then it'll become
probably a worse approximation as we get further and
further away from 0. And what they're
saying is, let's bound how bad of
an approximation that is when x is equal to 1/4. So if we say that this is x is
equal to 1/4 right over here, they're saying, look, take the
value of the polynomial at 1/4, subtract from that the value
of the function at 1/4, and then take the
absolute value and then that'll essentially give us the
absolute value of the error. Or that will give us the
absolute value of the remainder or give us the distance between
the two functions there. And they want us to
bound that distance. Now, to do this problem
there is something that you just kind
of have to know. And I've proven it
in another series of videos two videos
I think it took me in the Khan Academy
Calculus playlist. If you do a search for bounded
or error or approximation or Taylor, you should
probably find it. And that there's a general idea
here which we've proved that if you have some function so
I'm going to show the general so if you have some function
f of x and that you have some polynomial approximation
of it of degree n- some polynomial
approximation of degree n. And let's say that this
polynomial approximation is centered at a. In our particular case, a is 0. So that you're centered at a. So we could write we
could say this is about a. It's an approximation
about x equals a. We can bound the error. So let me first define
this error function here. Sometimes it's
called a remainder. So we could say, the error
function for the nth degree polynomial about a the
n-th degree Taylor polynomial approximation about a it
will be a function of x. So for any other x that you
pick, what will this error be? Is equal to the difference
between these two things. You could say it's f of x minus
that or that minus f of x. But let me just
write it this way. This is equal to f of x minus
the polynomial approximation of x. And if you want to take
the absolute value of this, that's equal to
absolute value of that. And if you're taking
absolute values, then you can switch the order. So this is the same thing
as the absolute value of the polynomial approximation
at x minus f of x. So the thing that you just need
to know is, we can bound this. We can bound this if
we know some properties about the n plus 1. So this is the nth
degree approximation. If we know some properties about
the n plus 1th derivative of f. So if we know that
the n plus 1th is the derivative of f is less
than or equal to some maximum value and in particular,
the absolute value of the n plus 1th
derivative of f is less than or equal to
some we could call this some maximum value
over the interval, over x is in the interval
between a and some b, where b is greater than a. Then we can make the statement
and this is, once again, something that I
prove in that video. I think I call it the
boundedness of the error remainder for Taylor
approximation. Something like that. Then we know that the
error function at any given x where x is greater than or
let me say this in particular. Is any given x that's part
of this interval where x is part of this
interval between a and b is going to be less
than or equal to M times x minus a to the n plus
1th power over n plus 1. So this is the thing
that you really have to know ahead of time to
be able to do this problem. It would be nearly impossible in
the time constraints of the AP exam to prove this
from first principles. I encourage you to
watch that video so you can understand
how this proof happens from first principles. But going into the AP
exam, based on the facts that this did show
up in the 2011 exam, it's probably good to
know this property, to know how to bound it. And this is clearly what they're
asking for because they're giving us so we know
what the fourth we know what p sub four is. p sub 4 of x it's up
to the fourth degree term of the polynomial
approximation of f about 0. In part B, we got all the
way the sixth degree term. So if you want to go just
to the fourth degree term, this is what p sub 4 is. So this is 1 plus x squared over
2 plus x to the fourth over 4. So we know that. And we want to bound this
thing right over here. So if we can find an M so
this is the fourth degree polynomial. This is the fourth
degree error that we're talking about in this case. Let me write it this way. This is the nth error
in the general case. But we want to bound
the fourth degree error. So if we want bound the
fourth degree error so we can say the fourth
degree error at b. In this case, we're
going to say or at 1/4 I should say, not b. I never mentioned a b before. I mentioned the b
when I prove it. The fourth degree
error at 1/4 is going to be less than or equal
to I did mention a b here so if you take this
to be 1/4, and 1/4 is part of that interval
so you can apply it here. So the fourth degree error,
I guess you could say, at 1/4 is going to be less
than or equal to some M times b I should say, 1/4 minus a. a in our particular case
for this problem is a 0. So 1/4 minus is just 0
to the n plus 1th power. So this is 4 this is the
fourth degree polynomial. n is 4 so the n plus 1 power
is the fifth power. All of that over
and sorry, this was supposed to be n
plus 1 all of that over n plus 1 factorial. So this is going to
be over 5 factorial. Don't want to confuse you. This was all of that is
over n plus 1 factorial. So all of this is
over 5 factorial. So we can make this statement
if we know that the fifth derivative the n
plus 1th derivative if we know that the fifth
derivative of f is less than or equal to some value M the
absolute value of the fifth derivative of f, I should say-
is less than or equal to some value at M over the interval
x is between 0 and 1/4. Those are our a's and b's
in this particular case. So when you look at
the graph and that's exactly what they gave us. They gave us the graph
of the absolute value of the fifth derivative of x. And 1/4 is sitting
right over here. So this is 1/4. We don't know exactly
what we hit over here. This looks like it's roughly,
I don't know, 31 or 32. But we know it's
definitely less than 40 over the interval
between 0 and 1/4. So we can pick M to be 40. We know that this is
less than or equal to 40 over that interval. So we can make this statement. And so we know that this
thing right over here is going to be less
because this over here is the same as this over here. We know this is less than
let me write it all out. This is and I know of people
who got fives on this example without being able to do this. So don't stress out if this
seems really bizarre too. This is really so
they can separate out who happened to
know this, really. So this we can say is
based on this property, we can say is less than
or equal to 40 times 1/4 to the fifth power. So this is 40 times
1/4 to the fifth power. So I could just say divided
by 4 to the fifth power times and then the
denominator over here we have 5 factorial. I'll just write it out. 5 times 4 times 3 times 2. And we don't have
to write the 1. That doesn't change the value. And now we can simplify this. We can divide the numerator
and the denominator by 4. So this becomes 10,
that just becomes a 1. We can divide it by 5. This becomes a 2,
that becomes a 1. We can divide by 1. That becomes a oh,
sorry, we can divide by 2. That becomes a 1,
that becomes a 1. And you say that this
quantity over here is going to be equal to 1. So let me write it. So all of this stuff is less
than or equal to 1 over 4 to the fifth times 3. That's all we have left
in the denominator. And so what is 4 to the fifth? You may or may not know. You can work it out by hand if
you like, but 4 to the fifth is the same thing as
2 to the 10th power because 4 is 2 squared. 2 to the 10th power, if you're
familiar with computer science, is 1,024. But you can work
it out yourself. So this is going to
be this is less than or equal to 1,024 times 3. So what is that? That is less than or
equal to 1 over 3. Oh, what is it? 72? 3,000. 1 over 3,072. So this quantity right over
here is less than 1 over 3,072. We know. We know that for a fact. Well, if something is
less than 1 over 3,072, it's definitely going to
be less than 1 over 3,000. 1 over 3,000 is a larger number. It has a smaller denominator. That's definitely less than
or equal to 1 over 3,000. And then we are done. We've proven that this is
less than 1 over 3,000. We've proven that the error at
1/4 is less than 1 over 3,000. 

Transcript for: Constructing a unit normal vector to a curve | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
- [Voiceover] So let's say
that we've got the curve R defined, so this is our curve R. It's X of T times I plus Y T times J, it's a curve in two dimensions on the XY plane. And let's graph it, just
graph it in kind of a a generalized form. So that's our Y-axis. This is our X-axis. Our curve R might look
something like this. It might look something,
let me draw a little bit more of a. Maybe it looks something like this. Maybe that's just part of it. And as T increases, we're
going in that direction right over there. What I want to do in this video, this is really more vector
algebra than vector calculus. Is think about at any given point here whether we can figure out a normal vector. In particular, a unit normal vector. Obviously you can figure
out a normal vector you can just divide it by its magnitude and you will get the unit normal vector. So I want to figure out at any given point a vector that's popping
straight out in that direction. And has a magnitude one. So that would be our unit normal vector. And to do that, first we'll think about what a tangent vector is. And from a tangent
vector we can figure out the normal vector. And it really goes back
to some of what you might have done in algebra one, or algebra two of if you have a slope of a line the negative reciprocal of
that slope is going to be the slope of that negative line. And we'll see a very similar thing when we do it right over
here with the vector with this vector algebra. So the first thing I
want to think about is how do we construct how do we construct a tangent line. Well, you could imagine at sum T at sum T this is what our position
vector is going to look like. So call that R one. R one right over there. And then if we wait, if we
allow T to go up a little bit, if T is time, we'll wait a little while a few seconds, or however
we were measuring things. And then R two might
look something like this. This is when T has gotten
a little bit larger. We're further down the path. And so one way that you can approximate the slope of the tangent line or the slope between
these two points, for now, is essentially the difference
between these two vectors. The difference between
these two vectors is you could view that you could view that as delta delta R. This vector plus that vector
is equal to that vector. Or, R two minus R one is going to give you this delta R right over here. And as R two, as that increment between R one and R two gets smaller and smaller and smaller. As we have a smaller
and smaller T increment as we get a smaller and
smaller T increment. So we get a smaller
and smaller T increment the slope of that delta R is going to more and more approximate the slope of the tangent line. All the way to the point that if you have an infinitely small change in T. So you have a DT. So you go from R then you just you change T a very small amount that delta R, and we can
kind of conceptualize that, as DR, that does approximate the A tangent vector. So if you have a very small change in T then your very small del DR I'll call it because now we're talking
about a differential. Your very small differential. Right over here. That is a tangent that is a tangent vector. So DR DR is a tangent tangent vector at any at any given point. And once again, all of this
is a little bit of review. But DR, we can write as DR is equal to DX times I plus the infinite small change in X times the I unit vector plus the infinite small change in Y times the J unit vector. And you see that, you see that if I were to draw if I were to draw a curve. Let me just draw another one. Actually, I don't even
have to draw the axis. If our DR looks like that if that is our DR then, we can break that down into its vertical and
horizontal components. This right over here is DY. And that right over there that right over there is that is DX. And so we see that DX times I. Actually, this is DX times I. And this is DY this is DY times J. DY is the magnitude, J gives us the direction. DX is the magnitude. I tells us that we're moving in the horizontal direction. Over here, this actually
would be a negative. This must be a negative
value right over here and this must be a positive value based on the way that I drew it. So that gives us a tangent vector. And now we want to from
that tangent vector figure out a normal vector. A vector that is essentially perpendicular to this vector right over here. And there's actually going to be two vectors like that. There's going to be the vector that kind of is perpendicular
in the right direction because we care about direction. Or the vector that's perpendicular
in the left direction. And we can pick either one. But for this video, I'm
gonna focus on the one that goes in the right direction. We're gonna see that
that's gonna be useful in the next video when we
start doing a little bit of vector calculus. And so let's think about
what that might be. And what I'll do to make
it a little bit clearer. Let me draw a DR again. I'll draw a DR like this. This is our DR. This is DR. And then this, right over here. This right over there, we
already said this is DY times I. And then this, sorry, this is DY times J. We're going in the vertical direction. DY times J. And then in a different color this right now if I
already used that color. I haven't used, oh, I haven't used or had blue yet. So this right over here is DX DX times I. So we know from our algebra courses you take the negative reciprocal so there's gonna be
something about swapping these two things around,
and then taking the negative one. But to figure out, we want the
one that goes to the right. So which one should we use? So let's think about it a little bit. If we, if we take DY times I. So we take this length in the I direction, we're gonna get we're gonna get this. We're gonna get that, so this is DY times I. And then if we were to if we were to take D,
if we were to just take DX times J, that would take us down. 'Cause DX it must be negative here since it's pointed to the left. So we have to swap the
sign of DX to go upwards. So we swap the sign of DX to go upwards. 'Cause I was here it was a negative sign. It went leftwards, we
want it to go upwards. So this is gonna be negative negative DX times J. We're now moving in
the vertical direction. And that, at least visually,
this isn't kind of a rigorous proof that I'm giving you. But this is hopefully good
a good visual representation that that does that that does get you. I should have drawn it a little bit. That does get you pretty that gets you pretty close,
just visually inspecting it to what looks like the perpendicular line. It's consistent with what
you learned in algebra class, as well. That we're taking the negative reciprocal, we're swapping the X's and the Y's. Or the change in X and the change in Y. And we're taking the
negative of one of them. And so we have our normal line just like that. Our normal vector. So a normal vector is going to be DYI minus DXJ. But then if we want a normalize it we want to divide by by that magnitude. So a normal, let me write it this way. A normal vector. So let me call this I'll just call it A. A normal vector is going to be DY times I. Is going to be DY times I. Minus DX times J. Minus DX times J. I'll do that same blue color. Minus DX times J. Now, if we want this to
be a unit normal vector we have to divide it
by the magnitude of A. But what is the magnitude of A? The magnitude of A is going to be equal to it's going to be equal to the square root of, and I'll just start
with the DX squared. So it's the negative DX squared. Which is just going to be DX squared. The same thing as positive DX squared. It's going to be DX squared plus DY squared. Plus DY squared. I could have put the
negative right in here but then when you square it,
that negative would disappear. But this thing right over here and we saw this when we first
started exploring arc length. This thing right over here
is the exact same thing as DS, and I know there's no DS that we've shown right over here. But we've seen it multiple times. When you're thinking of about if you if you think about the length of DR as DS that's exactly what
this thing over here is. So this can also be written as DS. So the infinite hasn't really changed in the arc length but it's a scaler quantity. You're not concerned you're just concerned with
the absolute distance. You're not concerned so
much with the direction. Another way to be do it is it's the magnitude it's the magnitude right over here of DR. So now we have everything
we need to construct our unit normal vector. Our unit normal vector at any point. And I'll now write N and I'll put a hat on top of it. Say that this is a unit normal vector. We'll have magnitude one is going to be equal to A divided by this. Or we could even write it this way. So we could write it as there are multiple ways we can write it. We can write it as I'll write it in this color. As DY times I minus DX times J. And then all of that times or maybe not times, divided by, DS. Divided by the magnitude of this. So divided by divided by DS. And obviously I can
distribute it on each of these by on each of these terms. But this right here, we've
been able to construct a unit normal vector at any point on this curve. 

Transcript for: 2D divergence theorem | Line integrals and Green's theorem | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
- [Instructor] Now that
we know a little bit about how to construct a unit normal vector at any point in a curve, that's what we did in the last video, I want to start exploring
an interesting expression. So the expression is the line
integral around a closed loop, and we're gonna go in the positive, counterclockwise orientation,
of a vector field F, dotted with the unit normal vector at any point on that curve ds, I'll write ds in magenta, ds. So first let's conceptualize
what this is even saying, and then let's manipulate it a little bit to see if we can come up with
and interesting conclusion. We actually will manipulate it. we'll use Green's theorem, and we're gonna actually come up with a two-dimensional version
of the divergence theorem, which all sounds very complicated, but hopefully we can get a
little bit of an intuition for it as to why it actually a
little bit of common sense. So first, lets just think about this. So let me draw a coordinate plane here. So let me do it in white. So this right over
here, that's our y-axis. That over there is our x-axis. Let me draw ourselves my curve. So my curve might look something like... I'll do it in the blue color. So my curve might look
something like this, my contour, and its going in the positive, counterclockwise direction just like that. And now we have our vector field, and, just a reminder, we've
seen this multiple times. My vector field will associate a vector with any point on the x-y plane, and it can be defined as
some function of x and y, actually, I'll call that P, some function of x and y
times the i unit vector. So it says what the i component
of the vector field is for any x and y point, and then what the j component, or what we multiply the j component by or the vertical component
by for any x and y point. So some function of x and y times i plus some other scalar
function of x and y times j. And so, if you give me any point, there'll be an associated vector with it. Any point, there's an associated vector, depending on how we define this function. But this expression right over here, we're taking a line integral. We care specifically about
the points along this curve, along this contour right over here. And so let's think about what
this piece right over here is actually telling us before we sum up all of these infinitesimally small pieces. So if we just take F dot n, so let's just think about
a point on this curve. A point on this curve, maybe
this point right over here. So associated with that
point, there is a vector. That's what the vector field does. F might look something
like that right over there. So that might be F at that point, and then we're gonna dot it with the unit normal vector at that point. So the unit normal vector
might look something like that. That would be n hat at that point. This is the vector field at that point. When you take the dot product,
you get a scaler quantity. You essentially just get a
number and you might remember it and there's several
videos where we go into detail about this but
that tells you how much those two vectors go together. It's essentially, if they're
completely orthogonal to each other you're gonna
get zero and if they go completely in the same
direction it's essentially just gonna multiply their
magnitudes times each other. And since you have a
unit normal vector here, what this is essentially going
to give you is the magnitude of the vector field F that
goes in the normal direction. So, think of it this way. So let's think about the component of this that goes in the normal direction. It might look something
like that, this would be the component that goes
the tangential direction. So, this expression right
over here is going to give us the magnitude of this vector. Let me write this down,
this right over here is the magnitude of the component
of F, in the normal direction or in the same direction
as that unit normal vector. Normal direction. And then were gonna multiply
that times a very infinitely small length of our contour, of our curve right around that point. So were gonna multiply that thing, times this right over here. And so you might say, "Well,
you know, okay, I kind of "get what that is saying but "how could this ever
be physically relevant, "or what could be the intuition for what "this expression is even measuring?" And to think about
that, I always visualize this is in two dimensions. You will later do things like this in three dimensions, so imagine this is a two dimensional universe
and we're studying gases. And so you have all these gas
particles in a two dimensional universe so they only can have
kind of an x and y coordinate and this vector field is essentially telling you the velocity
at any point there. So this is the velocity of
the particles at this point, this is the velocity of
particles at that point, that is the velocity of
particles at that point. And so, when you take F right
on this curve, that's the velocity of the particles at that point they're going in that direction. When you dot it with N it tells you, essentially, the speed going straight out right at that point, and then when you multiply that times ds,
you're essentially saying, at any given moment, how
fast, or at that point right over there on the curve,
how fast are the particles exiting the curve? And so if you were to sum up all of them which is essentially what this
integral is doing with the slight integral, it's essentially saying, how fast are the particles
exiting this contour? Are they even entering
the contour if you get a negative number? But since were taking the
unit normal vector that is outward-pointing, it's saying, "How fast are they exiting this thing?" If you've got a negative
number, that means there might be some net entrance. So, this whole expression
is if you take that analogy, it doesn't have to have that
physical representation, how fast are particles, are
two dimensional gas particles exiting the contour? In the future, you can do three dimensions where you have a surface and you can say, "How fast are things
exiting this surface?" And so let's start, now
that we hopefully have a decent conceptual understanding of what this could represent let's play
around with it a little bit, especially because we know
how to define a normal vector. So, let's rewrite it using what we know about how to construct a normal vector. So, if we rewrite it our
integral becomes this. We have our vector field F,
dotted with the normal vector. The normal vector we can write this way. A normal vector we saw was
dy times y minus dx times j. And then we had to divide
it by its magnitude. In order to make it a unit normal vector, the magnitude was this right over here, dx squared by dy squared,
which is the same thing as ds which is the same thing
as that little mini arc length that infinitely small
length of our contour. So, we're going to divide it by ds. We're going to divide it by ds. And then we're going to
multiply it times ds. We're going to multiply it by ds. And ds is just a scanner quality, and so we can actually even multiply this thing times ds before
taking the dot product or vice versa. But these two things
are going to cancel out. And so we're essentially
left with F dot this thing right over here. But we have F defined
right over here so let's take the dot products. I'll just write the line
integral symbol again. We're going in the
counterclockwise direction. And when we evaluate and now let's in let me pick a color that I have not used. I may have used many colors
so I'll do yellow again. So now, let's evaluate
F dot this business. So, dot product fairly straightforward. You take the product of the x-components, or essentially the magnitude
of the x-components. So, it's going to be P of
Y, P of xy, times the dy, plus the product of the
magnitudes of the y component or the j component. So it's going to be plus
Q of xy times minus dx, times negative dx. Well, that's going to give us negative Q of xy,
negative Q of xy times dx. So, this is kind of interesting statement. We've seen something not too
different from this before, when we saw even just the
definition of Green's theorem. Let me rewrite here just so we remember. So, the definition when we
learned about Green's theorem, it told us if we're taking a
line integral over this contour and there's multiple ways
to write it, but one way that we often still see it,
and we've explored it already in our videos is if we were
to say M times dx plus N times dy, this is equal to and I'm just restating
Green's theorem right here this is equal to the double
integral over the region that this contour surrounds of... And whatever function
you have here times dy, you take the partial of
that with respect to X, the partial of N with respect to X, and from that we subtract
whatever was on the dx side, so the partial of M with
respect to Y, and then you could say times df,
dy, or you could say da, for the infinitesimally
small little chunk of area. So, I'm going to write DA here. All right, dx, dy, or it could be dy. Or we might as well write DA here, since we're speaking in generalizations, where DA is an infinitely
small little chunk of area. So this here, this is just a
restatement of Green's theorem so we already know this. This is a restatement of Green's Theorem and how can we apply it here? Well, it's the same thing.
You have a little bit of sine differences but you
can apply Green's theorem here. This is going to be equal
to the double integral over the region that
this contour surrounds. And then, what we want to do is, we want to look at whatever
is the function that is being multiplied by the dy. In this case, this is the function that is being multiplied times the dy. And we want to take the partial
of that in respect to X. So, we're going to take the
partial of P with respect to X. So, the partial of P with respect to X. And then from that we
are going to subtract. We're going to subtract
the other function, whatever's being multiplied by dx, we're going to take the partial
of that with respect to Y. So here, we're going to take the partial of this whole thing with respect to Y, but we have a negative out here so it's going to be minus partial of Q with respect to Y and then we have DA, and obviously, these two negatives, subtracting the negative
just gives you a positive. So this is going to be
equal to the double integral over the region. And maybe you already
see where this is going, maybe getting a little bit excited. The partial of P with respect to X plus the partial of Q with respect to Y, dA. Now, okay, I took the partial of... "Well, what is this telling me, Sal?" Well, look at this thing right over here. P was originally the
function that was telling us the magnitude in the X direction. Q was telling us the
magnitude of the Y direction. We're taking the partial
of this with respect to X, we're taking the partial
of this with respect to Y and we're summing them. This is exactly the divergence of F. And if that doesn't make any sense, go watch the video on divergence. This right over here
is the divergence of F. This is the divergence
by definition, really, this is the divergence
of our vector field F. And so, we have a very interesting thing. This thing that we saw was
the original expression that we started studying
which is essentially saying, "What's the speed at which the particles "are exiting this surface?" We now get it in terms of
this little expression. And we'll interpret in an intuitive way and a little bit of this in a little bit. So this is equal to the
divergent of F times dA over the whole region
so the double integral. So, we're summing up the
divergence of F times the infinite, really small
little chunk over there and we're summing them
up over the whole region. Now, why does that make intuitive sense? And for you to realize why
it makes intuitive sense, you just have to remind
yourself what the divergence is. Divergence is a measure of
whether things are expanding or diverging or kind of contracting. If you have a point over
here where around that, the particles are kind of
moving away from each other, you would have a positive divergence here. If you have a point,
sometimes called a sync, where all of the particles
are kind of condensing or converging you would have
a negative divergence here. And now, so this should
make a lot of sense. You take any little
infinitely small area in this, you take any little infinitely small area, and then multiply that
times the divergence there. So, the more divergence, you're going to get a larger number and then you sum it up across the entire region. That makes a lot of sense. The more diverging that's
going on through your region, obviously, the more stuff that's going to be exiting your boundary over here. So, it actually makes complete sense, or hopefully it makes a
little bit of complete sense. If you were to see how fast are things exiting the surface, it's
really the two dimensional flux, how fast are things exiting the surface, and you take the sum of all of them, that's going to be the
same thing of summing all of the divergences over this area that the contour is surrounding. So, hopefully that makes a
little bit of sense to you. And it's actually another way of kind of thinking about Green's Theorem. And we also have just
explored what we just said, this expression that the
divergence summed over this region over here is the
same thing as the F dot n over the contour. That is, essentially, the two dimensional divergence theorem. 

Transcript for: Conceptual clarification for 2D divergence theorem | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's revisit the line integral F.n ds right over here because I want to make sure we have the proper conception and I was little "loosey goosey" with it in the last video and in this video I want to get a little bit more exacting and actually use units so that we really understand what's going on here So I've drawn our path "C" and we're traversing it in the positive counterclockwise direction and then I've taken a few sample points for F at any point in the x-y plane that associates a 2-dimensional vector maybe at that point the 2-dimensional vector looks like that, maybe at that point the 2-dimensional vector looks like that and then n is of course the unit normal vector at any point on our curve the outward pointing unit vector at any point on our curve Now in the last video, I talked about F as being some type of a velocity function that at any point it gives you the velocity of the particles there and that wasn't exactly right in order to really understand what's happening here in order to really conceptualize this as kind of flux through the boundary the rate of mass exiting this boundary here we actually have to introduce a density aspect to F So right over here, I've rewritten F, and I've rewritten it as of a product of a scalar function and a vector function so the scalar part right over here Rho of x,y Rho is a Greek letter often used to represent density of some kind in this case its mass density so at any given x,y point this tells us what the mass density is mass density will be some mass in a 2-dimensional world so it's mass per area and if we want particular units for our example- once again, this isn't the only way that this can be conceived of there's other applications, but this is the easiest way for my brain to process it we can imagine this as kilogram per square meter and this right over here is the velocity vector it tells us what is the velocity of the particles of that point so this is kind of saying, "How much particles do you have at a kind of a point? How dense are they?" and this is "How fast are they going and in what direction?" and this whole thing is a vector, it's a velocity vector but the components right over here M of x,y is just a number and you multiply that times a vector so M of x,y right over here is going to be a scalar function when you multiply by i it becomes a vector that's going to give you a speed and then N of x,y is also going to give you a speed and it tells you a speed in a j direction so it becomes a vector and a speed in the i direction becomes a vector as well but these speeds, the units of speed (let me write this over here) so now we're talking about in particular M of x,y and N of x,y that would be in units of distance per time and so maybe for this example we'll say the units are meters per second So let's think about the units will be for this function if we distribute the Rho, because really at any given x,y, it really is just a number so if we do that, we're going to get F- I'm not going to keep writing F of x,y we'll just understand that F, Rho, M and N are functions of x,y F is going to be equal to Rho times M times the unit vector i plus Rho times N times the unit vector j now what are the units here? what's Rho times M- what units are we going to get there? and we're gonna get the same units when we do Rho times N we'll we're gonna have, if we pick these particular units, we're going to have kilograms per meter squared times meters per second so a little bit of dimensional analysis here this meter in the numerator will cancel out with one of the meters in the denominator and we are left with something kind of strange kilograms per meter second which is essentially what the- if you view this vector has a magnitude in some direction the magnitude component is going to have these units right over here and then we're going to take this and we're dotting it with N N just only gives us a direction it is a unit-less vector- it's only specifying a direction at any point in the curve so when I take a dot product with this, it's going to give us essentially what is the magnitude of F going in the direction of N. So this right over here, when you take the dot, it's essentially a part of the magnitude of F going in N's direction and it's going to have the same exact units as F so the units of this part, you're going to have kilograms per meter second and let me make this very clear- So let's say we're focusing on this point over here F looks like that, its magnitude, the length of that vector is going to be in kilograms per meter second then we have a normal vector right over there and when you take the dot product, you're essentially saying "What's the magnitude that's going in the normal direction?" so essentially, what's the magnitude of that vector right over there it's going to be in kilograms per meter second and we're multiplying it times ds we're multiplying it times this infinitesimally small segment of the curve we're going to multiply that times ds well, what are the units of ds? it's going to be unit of length we'll just go with meters so this right over here is going to be meters there's this whole integral, you're going to have kilogram per meter second times meters so if you have kilograms per meter second and you were to multiply that times meters, what do you get? well this meters is going to cancel out that meters and then you get something that kinda starts to make sense you have kilogram per second and so this hopefully this makes it clear what's going on here this is telling us how much mass is crossing that little ds that little section of the curve per second and if you were to add up- and that's what integrals are all about, adding up an infinite number of these infinitesimally small ds's if you add all of that up you're going to get- the value of this entire integral is going to be in kilograms and kilograms per second, and it's essentially going to say, "How much mass is exiting this this curve at any given point? Or at any given time?" So this whole integral (let me rewrite it) of F.n ds tells us the mass exiting the curve per second and this should also be consistent in the last video we saw that this is equivalent to- and this is where we kinda view it as a 2-dimensional divergence theorem in the last video, we saw that this is equivalent to the double integral over the area of the divergence of f which is essentially just- well, I could write it 2 ways the divergence of f and this right over here, that's just the partial of the i component with respect to x (let me write it over here, I don't want to do this too fast and loose) so this right over here is going to be the partial of Rho M (let me write it like this), Rho M with respect to x plus the partial of the y component Rho N with respect to y times each little chunk of area Well, what are the units of this going to be right over here? we know what Rho M is- Rho M gives us kilogram per meter second but if we take the derivative with respect to meters again, the units for either of these characters are going to be kilograms per meter second per second because we're taking the derivative with respect - sorry per METER, we're taking the derivative with respect to another unit of distance so you're going to take per meter so you're going to have another meter right in the denominator that's going to be the units here and then you're multiplying it times an area so that would be meters squared, this right over here is square meters they cancel it out, and once again this whole part here that you're summing up gives us kilograms per second, so you're having a bunch of kilograms per second and you're just adding them up throughout the entire area right over here So hopefully this makes a little more sense, about how kinda how to conceptualize this vector function F if it confuses you, try your best to ignore it I guess for me at least, this helped me out having a stronger conception of what vector F could kind of represent 

Transcript for: Surface integral example part 2: Calculating the surface differential | Khan Academy
Now that we have our
parametrization right over here, let's get down to the
business of actually evaluating this surface integral. It's a little bit
involved, but we'll try to do it step by step. And so the first
thing I'm going to do is figure out what d sigma
is in terms of s and t, in terms of our parameters. So we can turn this whole
thing into a double integral with respect to or a double
integral in the s, t plane. And remember, d sigma
right over here, it's just a little
chunk of the surface. It's a little area of the
surface right over there. And we saw in previous
videos, the ones where we learned what
a surface integral even is, we saw that d
sigma right over there, it is equivalent to the
magnitude of the cross product of the partial of our
parametrization with respect to one parameter crossed
with the parametrization with respect to
the other parameter times the differentials
of each of the parameters. So this is what we're
going to use right here. It's a pretty simple looking
statement, but as we'll see, taking cross products tend
to get a little bit hairy. Especially cross products of
three dimensional vectors. But we'll do it step by step. But before we even
take the cross product, we first have to take the
partial of this with respect to s, and then the partial
of this with respect to t. So first, let's take the
partial with respect to s the partial of r
with respect to s. So right over here, all
the stuff with the t in it, you can just view
that as a constant. So cosine of t isn't
going to change. The partial of or the
derivative of cosine of s with respect to s is
negative sine of s. So this is going to
be equal to I'll put the negative out front
negative cosine of t sine of s. I'm going to keep everything
that has a t involved purple. Sine of s. And let me make I don't know. I'll make the vectors orange
i, and then you we'll plus and once again, we'll take the
derivative with respect to s, cosine of t is just a
constant, derivative of sine of s with respect
to s is cosine of s. So it's going to be plus
cosine of t cosine of s j. And then plus the derivative
of this with respect to s. Well, this is just a constant. The derivative of 5 with
respect to s would just be 0. This is the same thing. It's just a constant
with this does not change with respect to s. So it does so our partial here
with respect to s is just 0. So we could write even 0k. Let me write 0 I'll just
write 0k right over there. And that's nice to
see because that'll make our cross product a little
bit more straightforward. Now, let's take the
partial with respect to t. all right. And we get so the derivative
of this with respect to t now, cosine
of s is the constant. Derivative of cosine
t with respect to t is negative sine of t. So this is going to be negative
sine of t cosine of s i I'll do it in that I'll
use this blue i, and then plus now derivative of
this with respect to t. Derivative of cosine of
t is negative sine of t. So once again, so now we have
minus sine of t sine of s my hand is already
hurting from this. This is a painful problem. j plus derivative of sine
of t with respect to t. We're taking the partial
with respect to t. It's just cosine of t. So plus cosine of t. And now times the k unit vector. Now we're ready to take the
cross product of these two characters right over here. And to take the cross products
let me write this down. So we're going to
say, we're going to take the cross product
of that with that. Is going to be
equal to and I'm going to set up
this huge matrix. Or, it's really just a
three by three matrix but it's going to
be huge because it's going to take up a
lot of space to have to write down all this stuff. So maybe I'll take up
about that much space so that I have space to work in. And I'll write my
unit vectors up here. i, j, k. Or at least this is
how I like to remember how to take cross products
of three dimensional vectors. Take the determinant
of this three by three matrix the
first row are just our unit vectors the second
row is the first vector that I'm taking the
cross product of. So this is going to be negative. I'm just going to rewrite
this right over here. So it's going to be negative
cosine of t sine of s. And then you have
cosine of t cosine of s. And then you have 0
which will hopefully simplify our calculations. And then you have the next
vector, that's the third row. Negative sine of t cosine of s. And I encourage you
to do this on your own if you already know
where this is going. It's good practice. Even if you have to
watch this whole thing to see how it's done, try to
then do it again on your own because this is
one of those things you really got to do yourself
to really have it sit in. Negative sine of t sine of s. And then finally, cosine of t. So let's take the
determinant now. So first we'll think
about our i component. Are i component, you
would essentially ignore this column the first
column in the first row and then take the determinant of
this submatrix right over here. So it's going to
be i so this is going to be equal to
i times something. I'll put the something
in parentheses there. Normally you see the
something in front of the i but you can swap them there. So let me just so it's
going to be i times something. Ignore this column, that row. This determinant is cosine of t
cosine of s times cosine of t, which is going to be
cosine squared of t. Let me write it a little neater. Cosine squared of t cosine of s. And then from that we need
to subtract 0 times this. But that's just going to be 0
so we're just left with that. Now we're going to
do the j component. But you probably remember
the checkerboard thing when you have to evaluate
three by three matrices. Positive, negative, positive. So you will have a negative
you write a negative j. A negative coefficient, I
guess, in front of the j times something. And so you ignore
j's column, j's row. And so you have negative
cosine of t sine of s times cosine of t. Well, that's going
to be negative cosine squared of t times sine of s. Let me make sure I'm
doing that right. Ignore that and that. It's going to be
that times that. So yep. Negative cosine sine of
s minus 0 times that. And so that's just going to
be 0, so we can ignore it. And you have a negative
times a negative here so they can both
become positive. And then finally, you
have the k component. And once again, you can
go back to positive there. Positive, negative, positive
on the coefficients. That's just evaluating
a three by three matrix. And then you have plus
k times and now this might get a little
bit more involved because we won't have
the 0 to help us out. Ignore this row,
ignore this column, take the determinant
of this sub two by two. You have negative
cosine t sine s times negative sine of t sine s. Well, that's going to be
the negatives cancel out. So it's going to
be cosine of t sine of t times sine squared of s. And then, from that
we're going to subtract the product of these two things. But that product is
going to be negative so you subtract a
negative that's the same thing as
adding a positive. So plus and you're going to
have cosine t sine t again plus cosine t let me scroll
to the right a little bit plus cosine t sine t again. And that's times
cosine squared of s. Now this is already
looking pretty hairy but it already looks like
a simplification there. And that's where the
colors are helpful. Actually, now I have
trouble doing math in anything other than
multiple pastel colors because this actually
makes it much easier to see some patterns. And so what we can
do over here is we can factor out
the cosine t sine t. And so this is equal to
cosine t sine t times sine squared s plus cosine squared s. And this we know the
definition of the unit circle. This is just going
to be equal to 1. So that was a significant
simplification. And so now we get
our cross product being equal to let
me just rewrite it all. Our cross product. r sub s crossed with r sub t
is going to be equal to cosine squared t cosine s times our i
unit vector plus cosine squared t cosine sine of s
times our j unit vector plus all we have left because
this is just 1 cosine t sine t times our k unit vector. So that was pretty good
but we're still not done. We need to figure out the
magnitude of this thing. Remember, d sigma
simplified to the magnitude of this thing times ds dt. So let's figure out what
the magnitude of that is. And this is really
the home stretch so I'm really
crossing my fingers that I don't make any
careless mistakes now. So the magnitude of
all of this business is going to be equal
to the square root and I'm just going to
square each of these terms and then add them
up the square root of the sum of the squares
of each of those terms. So the square of
this is going to be cosine squared squared is
cosine to the fourth cosine to the fourth t cosine
squared of s plus cosine to the fourth t sine
squared s and I already see a pattern jumping
out plus cosine squared t sine squared t. Now, the first pattern
I see is this is just this first
part right over here. We can factor out a
cosine to the fourth t. Then we get something
like this happening again. So let's do that. So these first two terms
are equal to cosine to the fourth t times cosine
squared s plus sine squared s. Which, once again,
we know is just 1. So this whole expression
has simplified to cosine to the fourth t
plus cosine squared t sine squared t. Now we can attempt to
simplify this again because this term
and this term both have a cosine squared t in them. So let's factor those out. So this is going to be
equal to everything I'm doing is under
the radical sign. So this is going to be
equal to a cosine squared t times cosine squared t. And when you factor out
a cosine squared t here, you just have a plus
a sine squared t. And that's nice because that,
once again, simplified to 1. All of this is under
the radical sign. Maybe I'll keep drawing
the radical signs here to make it clear that
all this is still under the radical sign. And then this is really,
really useful for us because the square root
of cosine squared of t is just going to be cosine of t. So all of that business
actually finally simplified to something pretty
straightforward. So all of this is just going
to be equal to cosine of t. So going back to what
we wanted before, we want to rewrite what d sigma. It's just cosine t ds dt. so let me write that down. So d sigma and then we can
use this for the next part d sigma is equal to
cosine of t ds dt. And I'll see you
in the next part. 

Transcript for: Surface integral example part 1: Parameterizing the unit sphere | Khan Academy
What we will attempt to start
to do in this video is take the surface integral
of the function x squared over
our surface, where the surface in question,
the surface we're going to care about is
going to be the unit sphere. So it could be
defined by x squared plus y squared plus z
squared is equal to 1. And what I'm going to focus on
in this first video, because it will take us several
videos to do it, is just the parameterization of
this surface right over here. And as you'll see, this
is often the hardest part because it takes a little
bit of visualization. And then after that,
it's kind of mechanical, but it can be kind of
hairy at the same time. So it's worth going through. So first, let's think about
how we can parameterize and I have trouble
even saying the word. How we can parameterize
this unit sphere as a function of two parameters. So let's think about it. Let's think about
it a little bit. So first, let's just think
about the unit sphere. I'm going to take a side
view of the unit sphere. So let's take the unit sphere. So this right over
here is our z-axis. That's our z-axis. And then over here,
I'm going to draw this is going to be not
just the x or the y-axis. This is going to be entire
xy-plane viewed from the side. That is the xy-plane. Now, our sphere,
our unit sphere, might look something like this. The unit sphere itself is
not too hard to visualize. It might look
something like that. The radius let me
make it very clear. The radius at any point is 1. So this length right
over here is 1. That length right
over there is 1. And this is a sphere,
not just a circle. So I could even shade
it in a little bit, just to make it clear
that this thing has some dimensionality to it. So that's shading it in. It kind of makes it look a
little bit more spherical. Now, let's attempt
to parameterize this. And as a first step,
let's just think. If we didn't have to think
above and below the xy-plane, if we just thought about where
this unit sphere intersected the xy-plane, how we
could parameterize that. So let's just think about it. So where it intersects
the xy-plane. It intersects it there, and
there, and actually everywhere. So it intersects it
right over there. So let's just draw
the xy-plane and think about that intersection,
and then we could think about
what happens as we go above and below the xy-plane. So on the xy-plane, this little
region where we just shaded in. So let me draw. So now you could view
this as almost a top view. The z-axis is now going to be
pointing straight out at you, straight out of the screen. So that's x. So let me draw it. So that's x, and then this
right over there is y. So this thing that we
were viewing sideways, now we're viewing
it from the top. And so now our unit
sphere is going to look something like
this viewed from above. What I just drew, this dotted
circle right over here, this is going to be where
our unit sphere intersects I labeled that y. That should be x. Don't want to
confuse you already. Let me clear that. So this is our x-axis. This is our x-axis. So this little
dotted blue circle, this is where our unit sphere
intersects the xy-plane. And so using this,
we can start to think about how to parameterize
at least our x- and y-values, our x- and
y-coordinates, as a function of a first parameter. So the first
parameter, we can think of something that is so this
is the z-axis popping straight out at us. So we're essentially,
if we're rotating around that z-axis viewed from above,
we could imagine an angle. I will call that angle
s, which is essentially saying how much we're
rotating from the x-axis towards the y-axis. You could think about
it in the xy-plane or in a plane that is
parallel to the xy-plane. Or you could say, going
around the z-axis. The z-axis popping
straight up at us. And the radius here is always 1. It's a unit sphere. So given this
parameter s, what would be your x- and y-coordinates? And now we're thinking
about it right if we're sitting
in the xy-plane. Well, the x-coordinate
this goes back to the unit circle definition
of our trig functions. The x-coordinate is
going to be cosine of s. It would be the radius, which
is 1, times the cosine of s. And the y-coordinate would
be 1 times the sine of s. That's actually where we get our
definitions for cosine and sine from. So that's pretty
straightforward. And in this case, z is
obviously equal to 0. So if we wanted to add our
z-coordinate here, z is 0. We are sitting in the xy-plane. But now, let's think
about what happens if we go above and
below the xy-plane. Remember, this is
in any plane that is parallel to the xy-plane. This is saying how we are
rotated around the z-axis. Now, let's think about if
we go above and below it. And to figure out how
far above or below it, I'm going to introduce
another parameter. And this new parameter I'm
going to introduce is t. t is how much we've rotated
above and below the xy-plane. Now, what's
interesting about that is if we take any other cross
section that is parallel to the xy-plane now, we are
going to have a smaller radius. Let me make that clear. So if we're right over there,
now where this plane intersects our unit sphere, the
radius is smaller. The radius is smaller
than it was before. Well, what would
be this new radius? Well, a little bit
of trigonometry. It's the same as this
length right over here, which is going to
be cosine of t. So the radius is going
to be cosine of t. And it still works
over here because if t goes all the way to
0, cosine of 0 is 1. And then that works
right over there when we're in the xy-plane. So the radius over here
is going to be so that right over
there is cosine of 0. So this is when t is equal to 0. And we haven't rotated
above or below the xy-plane. But if we have rotated
above the xy-plane, the radius has changed. It is now cosine of t. And now we can use that to truly
parameterize x and y anywhere. So now, let's look at
this cross section. So we're not necessarily
in the xy-plane, we're in something that's
parallel to the xy-plane. And so if we're up here,
now all of a sudden, the cross section if
we view it from above, might look something like this. It might look
something like this. We're viewing it from
above, this cross section right over here. Our radius right over
here is cosine of t. And so given that
I guess altitude that we're at, what would now
be the parameterization using s of x and y? Well, it's the exact same
thing, except now our radius isn't a fixed 1. It is now a function of t. So we're now a
little bit higher. So now, our
x-coordinate is going to be our radius,
which is cosine of t. That's just our radius. Times cosine of s. Times cosine of s, how
much we've angled around. And in this case, s has gone
all the way around here. S has gone all the
way around there, so it's going to be cosine
of t times cosine of s. And then, our
y-coordinate is going to be our radius, which is
cosine of t times sine of s. Same exact logic here, except
now we have a different radius. Our radius is no longer 1. Times sine of s. I'm running out of space,
let me scroll to the right a little bit. And I know this
looks very confusing, but you just have to say,
at any given level we are, we're parallel to the x-axis. We're kind of tracing
out another circle where another plane intersects
our unit sphere. We're now then
rotating around with s. And so our radius will change. It's a function of how
much above and below we've rotated how much
above or below the xy-plane we've rotated. So this is just our
radius instead of 1. And then, s is how much we've
rotated around the z-axis. Same there for the y-coordinate. And then the z-coordinate
is pretty straightforward. It's going to be
completely a function of t. It's not dependent on how
much we've rotated around here at any given altitude. It is what our
altitude actually is. Now, we can go straight to
this diagram right over here. Our z-coordinate is just
going to be the sine of t. So our z is equal to sine of t. So let me write that down. So the z is going to
be equal to sine of t. So now, every point
on this sphere can be described as a
function of t and s. Now, we have to think
about over what range will they be defined. Well, s is going to go at any
given level, you could think. For any given t, s is going
to go all the way around. We see that right over here. At any given level
viewed from above, s is going to go
all the way around. So thinking about
in radians, s is going to be between 0 and 2 pi. And t is essentially our
altitude in the z-direction. So t can go all
the way down here, which would be
negative pi over 2. So t can be between
negative pi over 2. And it can go all the
way up to pi over 2. It doesn't need to go all
the way back down again. And so it goes all the way
back it goes only up to pi over 2. And then we have our
parameterization. Let me write this down
in a form that you might recognize even more. If we wanted to write our
surface as a position vector function, we could
write it like this. We could write it r is
a function of s and t, and it is equal to
our x-component. Our i-component is going to
be cosine of t cosine of s i. And then plus our y-component
is cosine of t sine of s plus our z-component,
which is the sine which is just oh, I
forgot our j vector. j plus the z-component, which
is just sine of t sine k. And we're done. And these are the ranges that
those parameters will take on. So that's just the first step. We've parameterized
this surface. Now we're going to
have to actually set up the surface integral. It's going to involve
a little bit of taking a cross product,
which can get hairy, and then we can actually
evaluate the integral itself. 

Transcript for: Surface integral example part 3: The home stretch | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
- [Instructor] So now
that we have been able to express our d sigma, I think we're pretty close to evaluating the integral itself, and one thing I do wanna point out that might have been nagging you from the end of the last video, at the end of the last video, I took the principal root
of cosine squared of t, and I simplified that to
just being cosine of t. And you might have said,
"Wait, wait, wait, wait, "What if cosine of t evaluated
to a negative number? "If I then square it,
it would be positive, "and then if I took the
principal root of that, "I would then get the
positive version of it. "I would essentially
get the absolute value "of the cosine of t." And the reason why we were
able to do this in particular in this video or in this problem is because we saw t takes on values between negative pi over two
and positive pi over two. And so cosine of anything that's either in the first or the fourth quadrant, so this is t right over here, the cosine will always be
positive for our purposes, for the sake of this surface integral. Cosine of t is always
going to be positive, and so in this case,
we don't have to write absolute value of cosine of t. We can just write cosine of t, and so hopefully that makes you satisfied. That was just based on how
we parameterized the t. Now, that out of the way, let's actually evaluate the integral. Our original integral, the original integral, just to remind us, was the double, or I should
say the surface integral, of x squared, d sigma. We already know what d sigma is. Now we just have to write x squared in terms of the parameters. Well, we know the parameterization of x. The x, in terms of the parameters
right over here is cosine. This is our parameterization: x is going to be equal
to cosine t, cosine of s. Let me write that down:
x of s and t is equal to, I already forgot, I have a
horrible memory, is equal to, we have to go back to the
original parameterization, not these partial derivatives. Cosine t, cosine s. Cosine t, cosine s. Cosine t, and then cosine s, and we're taking the
integral of that squared. So let's think about this a little bit. So let's just do this
part right over here. If we square x, we're going to get cosine squared t, cosine squared s. Cosine squared s, that's the x squared
part right over there, and then you have the d sigma, which is this stuff,
which is times cosine, lemme do that same green, don't wanna confuse you with
different shades of colors, times cosine of t, ds, dt. And now that we have this in terms of the parameters, the
differentials of parameters, this essentially becomes a double integral with respect to these two parameters, and so, and the good thing is that the boundary is
pretty straightforward with respect to s and t:
s takes on all values, s takes on all values
between zero and two pi, t takes on all values
between negative two pi, and, sorry, negative pi over two and positive pi over two. So first, the way I wrote over here, we're gonna integrate
with respect to s first, s goes between zero
and two pi, and then t, lemme write and make clear, this is s, and then t will go between
negative pi over two and positive pi over two. And so let's see if we can
simplify this a little bit. This is equal to the double integral over that same region,
over that same area, I guess we could call it,
over that same area of, well now we have this cosine squared of t and then we have another
cosine of t right over there, so lemme just right it this way, as cosine to the third of
t times cosine squared... Cosine squared of s, and then ds, lemme color code it a little bit, ds, and so this is the
integral for the ds part, and then dt. And this is when we
integrate with respect to s, notice these two, the
t parts and the s part, they're just multiplied by each other, so when we're taking the
integral with respect to s, this cosine cubed of t
really is just a constant, we can factor it out, and it
could look something like this, so let me rewrite it, this
could be the integral from, t goes from, I'll rewrite the boundaries, negative pi over two,
to positive pi over two, cosine cubed of t, I just factor that out, and then I'll write the s part, times the integral, s is going to go between zero and two pi,
and I'll write this in blue, cosine squared of s, ds, and
then you have dt out there, you have dt, I'm gonna do the dt in green, gimme that same green, dt. And now, this outer sum we can view it, you essentially view it as the product, well, of all of this
business right over here, this thing has no t's
involved in it whatsoever, so we can rewrite this, and I'll write all the stuff
involving the t's as green. So we can rewrite this as pi over two, from negative pi over two, to pi over two, cosine cubed of t dt times the integral, and I'm really just rearranging things, I guess you could kind of view this as the associative property, or I guess the commutative property. Well those things always confuse me, times the integral of zero to two pi of cosine squared of s, ds, and you didn't have to do it this way, you could've just evaluated it while it was kind of mixed like this, but this'll help us kind
of work through the, the trigonometry a little bit easier. Now to solve these two integrals, we just have to resort
to our trigonometry. Cosine squared of s, we can
rewrite that as 1/2 plus one, actually let me do that
in that same blue color so we don't get confused. That is the same thing as
1/2 plus 1/2 cosine of two s, and cosine cubed t, well
that's the same thing, let's see, we can factor
out a cosine of t, so let me rewrite, ah let's just do it, well let me just do it,
both at the same time, just get all the trigonometry out of way. This right over here can
be rewritten as cosine of t times cosine squared of t,
and the intuition here is, if we can get a product
of a sine doing something with a cosine, because
cosine is sine's derivative, that's kind of, y'know, u-substitution, you see a function and its derivative, you can just kind of
treat it as a variable, so that's what we're trying
to get to right over here. So cosine squared of t can be rewritten as one minus sine squared of t, so this is cosine of t times
one minus sine squared of t. And so we can rewrite this as cosine of t minus cosine of t, sine squared of t, and you might say "Wait, "this looked a lot simpler
than this down here." That is true, it looks simpler, but it's easier to take
the antiderivative of this, easier to take the
antiderivative of cosine of t, and even over here, you have derivative of sine of t, which is cosine of t, and so essentially you
can do u-substitution, which you probably can
do in your head now. So let's evaluate each of these integrals. So this one, let me rewrite them just so we don't get too confused, so we have the integral
from negative pi over two, to pi over two, of cosine of t minus cosine of t, sine squared of t, dt, times the integral from zero to two pi of 1/2 plus 1/2 cosine of 2s, d s. Now we are ready to take
some antiderivatives, the antiderivative of this
right over here is going to be, the antiderivative of cosine
t, well that's just sine t, and then right over here, the derivative of sine t is cosine of t. So we can just essentially, if you wanna do
u-substitution, you would say, u is equal to sine of t, d u
is equal to cosine of t, dt, and you do all of that, but the, what we probably cannot
do in your head is, okay, I have the sine
t's derivative there, so I can treat sine t just
like I would treat a t, or I would treat an x. So this is going to be, you
still have this negative sign, minus sine to the third of t over three, if this was just a t squared, the antiderivative would be
t to the third over three, but now since we have a derivative, we can kind of treat it the same way, which is essentially doing
u-substitution in our head. So that's that, and we're
going to evaluate it from negative pi over two, to pi over two. And so this is equal to, if
you evaluate it at pi over two, sine of pi over two is one. So it's one minus 1/3, so that's just 2/3, actually lemme not write it that way, I don't wanna confuse people, and then minus sine of
negative pi over two, well that's going to
be negative one minus, sine of negative pi over two is negative one to the third
power is negative one, so this is negative 1/3. And so this is going to
be equal to, this is 2/3, and this is negative one plus
1/3, which is negative 2/3, but then you have a negative out front, so this is plus 2/3 again. So this part at least evaluates to 4/3. This part, all this, is
really the home stretch, that all evaluates to 4/3. Now this part right over here, antiderivative of 1/2 is just 1/2 t, antiderivative of cosine of 2s, well, ideally you would
have a two out front here, out front, lemme write
and make this clear, so if I were to take the antiderivative of cosine of 2s, ideally you
would want a two out here, so you have the derivative of the 2s, so you could put a two out front, but then you would have
to put a 1/2 out front so that you're not
changing the value of it, and of course you would
have a ds right over here. I'm just taking a general antiderivative, but once you have it like this, then this just like taking the antiderivative of cosine of s. This becomes, antiderivative
of cosine is sine. So this will become sine of s. So this right over here is just sine of s, and then you have the
1/2 out front, times 1/2, but then of course,
and then you would have plus a constant if you were
taking an indefinite integral, but we're taking a definite one, so you don't have to
worry about the constant, so just the antiderivative
of cosine of 2s, just the antiderivative of
cosine of 2s is 1/2 sine of s. And so you have this constant out front, 1/2 times 1/2 is 1/4. So it's going to be plus 1/4 sine of 2s. That's the antiderivative, and now we're going to evaluate
it from zero to two pi, and in either situation, this thing's going to evaluate to zero. Sine of zero is zero,
sine of four pi is zero, and so you're gonna have 1/2
times two pi, which is just pi, plus zero, 'cause sine of four pi is zero, minus 1/2 times zero, zero;
1/4 times sine of zero, zero, so you're essentially
just gonna end up with pi, so this whole thing right
over here evaluates to pi. And so we're done! You take the product of these
two things, 4/3 times pi, our entire surface integral
evaluates to: 4/3 pi. So this is equal to 4/3 pi, which is neat! If you have a sphere of radius one, its surface area, or actually
no, I shouldn't even go that, because, let me be very careful. I shouldn't make that statement, because this wasn't just
with respect to one. But, we have at least
evaluated the surface integral, and we deserve, I think,
a bit of a rest now. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex2 part 1: Parameterizing the surface | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's attempt another
surface integral, and I've changed the
notation a little bit. Instead of writing the
surface as a capital sigma, I've written it as a capital S.
Instead of writing d lowercase sigma, I wrote d uppercase
S, which is still a surface integral
of the function y. And the surface we care about
is x plus y squared mins z is equal to 0. X between 0 and 1,
y between 0 and 2. Now, this one might be a
little bit more straightforward than the last one we
did, or at least I hope it's a little bit more
straightforward, because we can explicitly define
z in terms of x and y. And actually we can
even explicitly define x in terms of y and z. But I'll do it the other way. It's a little bit easier
for me to visualize. So if you add z to both sides of
this equation right over here, you get x plus y
squared is equal to z, or z is equal to
x plus y squared. And this is actually
pretty straightforward. this surface is pretty
easy to visualize, or we can give our best
attempt at visualizing it. So if that is our z-axis,
and that is our x-axis, and that is the y-axis,
we care about the region x between 0 and 1. So maybe this is x equals
1, and y between 0 and 2. So let's say this is 1,
this is 2 in the y area. So we essentially care
about the surface over this, over this region
of the xy plane. And then we can think about
what the surface actually looks like. This isn't the surface. This is just kind of the range
of x's and y's that we actually care about. And so let's think
about the surface. When x and y are 0, z is 0. So we're going to
be sitting let me do this in a let
me do this in green. z is going to be right over there. And now as y increases, or
if when x is equal to 0, if we're just talking
about the zy plane, z is going to be
equal to y squared. So this might be
z is equal to 4. This is z is equal to 2, 1, 3. So z is going to do
something like this. It's going to be a
parabola in the zy plane. It's going to look
something like that. Now, when y is equal to
0, z is just equal to x. So as x goes to 1,
z will also go to 1. So z will go like this. The scales of the axes aren't
they are not drawn to scale. The z is a little
bit more compressed than the x or y the
way I've drawn them. And then from this
point right over here, you add the y squared. And so you get
something that looks so this is this point there. And then this point, when y is
equal to 2 and x is equal to 1, you have z is equal to 5. It's going to look
something like this. And then you're going to have
a straight line like that, at this point, is
right over there. And this surface is the surface
that we are going to take, or the surface over which we're
going to evaluate the surface integral of the function y. And so one way you
could think about it, y could be maybe the mass
density of this surface. And so when you multiply
y times each dS, you're essentially figuring out
the mass of that little chunk, and then you're figuring out
the mass of this entire surface. And so one way you could
imagine as we go more and more in that direction
as y is increasing, this thing is getting
more and more dense. So this part of the
surface is more dense than as y becomes
lower and lower. And then that would
actually give us the mass. With that out of the way,
let's actually evaluate it. And so, as you
know, the first step is to figure out
a parametrization. And it should be
pretty straightforward, because we can write z
explicitly in terms of x and y. And so we can actually use x
and y as the actual parameters, or if we want to just substitute
it with different parameters, we could. But let me so let's just
write let me do that. So let me just write x is equal
to and in the spirit of using different notation, instead
of using s and t, I'll use u and v. X is equal to u,
let's say y is equal to v, and then z is going to be
equal to u plus v squared. And so our surface, written
as a vector position function or position vector
function, our surface, we can write it as
r, which is going to be a function of
u and v. And it's going to be equal to ui plus
vj plus u plus v squared k. And then u is going
to be between 0 and 1, because x is just equal
to u or u is equal to x. So u is going to
be between 0 and 1. And then v is going
to be between 0 and 2. I'm going to leave you there. In the next video,
we'll actually set up the surface
integral now that we have the parametrization done. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex2 part 2: Evaluating integral | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Now that we've set up
the parametrization, let's try to evaluate
the integral. And the next thing
we'll do is essentially try to express ds right over
here in terms of du and dv. And we've seen this before. ds is going to be equal to the
magnitude of the cross product of the partial of r with
respect to u crossed with the partial of r
with respect to v du dv. So first, let's take
the cross product, and we'll do that
with a 3 by 3 matrix. I'll do that right over here. We set up, and I'll just kind
of fill in what r sub u and r sub v is in the actual
determinant right over here. So first we have our
components, i, j, and k. And now first, let's
think about what r sub u is, the partial
of r with respect to u. Well, its i component
is going to be 1. The partial of u with
respect to u is just 1, so its i component is 1. Its j component
is going to be 0, partial of v with
respect to u is 0. v does not change
with respect to u, so this is going to be 0. This should be
parentheses around here. Partial of this with respect to
u is just going to be 1 again. The partial of v squared
with respect to u is just 0. So this is just 1 again. And then r sub v, the partial
of r with respect to v, the i component
is going to be 0, j component is going to
be 1, and the partial of u plus v squared with
respect to v is going to be 2v. So it's a pretty
straightforward determinant, so let's try to evaluate it. So the i component,
it's going to be i. So we cross out this
column, this row. It's going to be 0 times
2v minus 1 times 1. So essentially, it's just
going to be negative 1 times i. So we're going to
have negative i, so this is equal to negative i. And then the j
component and we're going to have to put a negative
out front, because, remember, we do that checkerboard pattern. So cross out that
row, that column. 1 times 2v is 2v. Let me make sure I got that. 1 times 2v is 2v
minus 0 times 1. So it's just going to be 2v. But since it was the
j component, which is going to be negative, it's
going to be negative 2vj. Let me make sure
I did that right. That column, that row, 1
times 2v is 2v minus 0 is 2v. The checkerboard pattern,
you'd have a negative j. So you have negative 2vj. And then we have
find the k component. Cross out that row, that
column, 1 times 1 minus 0. So it's going to be plus k. So if we want the
magnitude of this, this whole thing right
over here is just going to be the
square root I'm just taking the magnitude
of this part right over here, the
actual cross product. It's going to be
negative 1 squared, which is just 1, plus negative
2v squared, which is 4v squared, plus 1
squared, which is just 1. So this whole thing
is going to evaluate to we have 2 plus
2v squared du dv. Or actually, let me I
almost made a mistake. That would have been a disaster. 2 plus 4v squared du dv. And if we want,
maybe it'll help us a little bit if we factor
out a 2 right over here. This is the same thing as 2
times 1 plus 2v squared du dv. If you factor out
the 2, you get this is equal to the square root of
2 times the square root of 1 plus 2v squared du dv. And I now think we are ready to
evaluate the surface integral. So let's do it. All right. So let me just write
this thing down here. So I'm going to write everything
that has to do with v, I'm going to write in purple. So I'm just going to write
the ds part right over here. It is the square root of 2
times the square root of 1 plus 2v squared. And then we're going
to have du, which I'll write in green,
du, and then dv. So this is just the ds part. This is just the ds. Now, we have the
y right over here. y is just equal to v. All right,
so I'll write that in purple. So y is just equal to v. That is
y let me make it very clear and all of this is ds. And now I can write the
bounds in terms of u and v. And so the u part,
u is the same thing as x. It goes between 0 and 1. And then v, v is
the same thing as y, and y goes between, or
v goes between, 0 and 2. And I now think we're
ready to evaluate. And the u and v variables
are not so mixed up, so we can actually separate
out these two integrals, make this a product of
two single integrals. The first thing, if we look
at it with respect to du, all this stuff in purple is just
a constant with respect to u, so we can take it out
of the du integral. We can take all this purple
stuff out of this du integral. And so this double integral
simplifies to the integral from 0 to 2 of I'll write it
as the square root of 2v times the square root of
1 plus 2v squared. So I factored out
all of this stuff. And then you have times the
integral from 0 to 1 du, and then times d,
and then you have dv. And now, if this was really
complicated, I could say, OK, this is just going
to be a function of u. It's a constant
with respect to v. And you could factor
this whole thing out and separate the integrals. But this is even easier. This integral is just
going to evaluate to 1. So this whole thing
just evaluates to 1. And so we've simplified this
into one single integral. So this simplifies
to and I could even take the square root of 2
out front the square root of 2 times the integral
from v is equal to 0 to v is equal to 2 of v
times the square root of 1 plus 2v squared dv. And so we really are
in the home stretch of evaluating this
surface integral. And here, this is basic. This is actually a little
bit of u substitution that we can do in our head. If you have a function, or
kind of this embedded function right over here,
1 plus 2v squared, what's the derivative
of 1 plus 2v squared? Well, it would be 4v. And we have something
almost 4v here. We can make this 4v by
multiplying it by 4 here, and then dividing
it by 4 out here. This doesn't change the
value of the integral. And so now this part
right over here, it's pretty straightforward
to take the antiderivative. The antiderivative
of this is going to be we have this embedded
function's derivative right over here, so we can kind of
just treat it like an x or a v. Take the antiderivative
with respect to this thing right
over here, and we get this is essentially 1 plus
2v squared to the 1/2 power. We increment it by
1, so it's 1 plus 2v squared to the 3/2 power. And then you divide by 3/2,
or you multiply by 2/3, so times 2/3. So this is the
antiderivative of that. And then, of course, you
still have all of this stuff out front square
root of 2 over 4 And we are going to
evaluate this from 0 to 2. And actually, just to simplify
it, let me factor out the 2/3. We don't have to worry
about that at 2 and 0. So I'm going to factor out
the 2/3, so times 2 over 3. And actually, this
will cancel out. That becomes a 1. That becomes a 2. And so we are left this
stuff over here is 1/6 times. And now if you evaluate this
at 2, you have 2v squared. That's going to be 2
times 4 is 8 plus 1 is 9, 9 to the 3/2 power. So 9 to the 1/2 is 3,
3 to the 3rd is 27. So it's going to be equal to 27. And then minus this
thing evaluated at 0. Well, this evaluated at
0 is just going to be 1. 1 to the 3/2 is
just 1, so minus 1. And so this gives us oh,
I almost made a mistake. There should be a square
root of 2 up here, square root of 2 over
6 times 27 minus 1. So drum roll. This gives us the value of
our surface integral is, let's see, 27 minus 1 is 26. So we get 26 times the
square root of 2 over 6. And we can simplify
it a little bit more. Divide the numerator
and denominator by 2, and you get 13 square
roots of 2 over 3. And we are done. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex3 part 1: Parameterizing the outside surface | Khan Academy
Let's try another
surface integral. And the surface that
we're going to care about, s, is this shape, the outside
of this shape right over here. And you can see we can
kind of decompose it into three separate surfaces. The first surface is its
base, which is really the filled-in unit
circle down here. The second surface,
which we have in blue, is you can kind of view
it as the side of it. You can view it as kind of
like the side of a cylinder, but the cylinder has been
cut by a plane up here. And the plane that cuts
it is the plane z is equal to 1 minus x. And obviously, the plane itself
goes well beyond this shape. But where that plane
cuts the cylinder kind of defines this shape. So the blue surface is above
the boundary of the unit circle and below the plane. And then the third
surface is the subset of the plane, of that
purple plane, of z equals 1 minus x, that
overlaps, that kind of forms the top of this cylinder. And so we can rewrite
this surface integral as the sum of three
surface integrals. It's the surface
integral of z over s1 plus the surface
integral of z over s2 plus the surface
integral of z over s3. And we can just tackle each
of these independently. So let's start with surface 1. And you might immediately want
to start parameterizing things and all the rest, but there's
actually a very fast way to handle this surface integral,
especially because we're taking the surface
integral of z. What value does z take on
throughout this surface, throughout this filled-in
unit circle right over here? Well, that surface
is on the xy plane. When we're on the xy
plane, z is equal to 0. So for this entire surface,
z is going to be equal to 0. You're essentially
integrating 0. 0 times dS is just
going to be 0. So this whole thing is
going to evaluate to 0. So that's about as simple as
evaluating a surface integral can get. But it's always important
to least keep a look out for things like that. And it'll keep you from kind
of going down this wild goose chase that wouldn't
be a wild goose chase. You would eventually
get the answer anyway. But you don't have
to waste so much time in parameterizing
things and all the rest. Now let's tackle the
other two surfaces, and we'll focus on surface 2. So the x and y-values,
the valid x and y-values, are the x and y-values along
the unit circle right over here. So we can really
parameterize it the way that we would parameterize
a traditional unit circle. So we could set x is
equal to let's set it and our radius is 1,
so x is equal to cosine of I'll use the parameter u. x is equal to cosine of u. And then let's say y
is equal to sine of u. And then u is the angle
between the positive x-axis and wherever we are essentially
on that unit circle. So that right over there, that
angle right over there is u. And so this would
give us for u so as long as u is
between 0 and 2 pi, that we're essentially going
around this unit circle. So those are all the
possible x and y-values that we can take on. And then the z-value is what
takes us up above that boundary and gets it someplace
along the surface. But this is interesting,
because the z-value, it can take on obviously a
bunch of different values, but it always has to be below
this plane right over here. So for this z-value, I'm going
to introduce a new parameter. Let's call it z v. That's
the second parameter. And v is definitely going
to be greater than 0. z and v, they're the same thing. They're always going
to be positive, so they're definitely going to
be greater than or equal to 0. But it's not less than or
equal to some constant thing. This has kind of a
variable roof on it. And so it's always
going to be less than or equal to this
plane right over here. And so we could say is less
than or equal to 1 minus x. We could have said so we
know that z is less than or equal to 1 minus x, but if we
use the new parameters, v is z, and 1 minus x is the same
thing as 1 minus cosine u. And so now we have
our parameterization. We are ready to actually
evaluate the surface integral. And to do that, first
let's do the cross product. We want to figure
out what dS is, and we have to take the
magnitude of the cross product of the partial of
our parameterization with respect to u, crossed
with the partial with respect to v. Actually, let me just
write all this stuff down instead of trying
to do shortcuts. So dS, and this is all
let me do it in blue still because we're talking
about surface 2. dS is going to be equal to the
magnitude of the cross product of the partial of our
parameterization with respect to u, crossed with our partial
of our parameterization with respect to v, du dv. So let's write the partial
of our parameterization with respect to u. And you might say, wait,
where's our parameterization? Well, it's right over here. I just didn't write it in
the traditional ijk form, but I can. I could write r is
equal to maybe I call it r2 because we're
talking about surface 2. I shouldn't use
that orange color because I used
that for surface 1. I'll use that in a
still bluish color. So r for surface 2
is equal to cosine of ui plus the
sine of uj plus vk. And this is the range that the
u's and the v's can take on. If I want to take the partial
of r with respect to u, I would get let's
see, the derivative of cosine u with respect
to u is negative sine ui. The derivative of sine of u with
respect to u is plus cosine uj. And the derivative of v
with respect to u is just 0. So that's our partial
with respect to u. Our partial let' me do
this in a different color just for the sake of it. Our partial with respect
to v is equal to well, this is going to be 0,
this is going to be 0, and we're just
going to have one k. So it's just going
to be equal to k. And so now we're ready
to at least evaluate this cross product. So we'll evaluate
the cross product, and then we'll take
the magnitude of that, so just this part, so
just the cross product, the inside of that, before
we take the magnitude. So copy and paste. So just that is going to be
equal to the determinant, the 3 by 3 determinant. Let me write my
components, i, j, k. And then for r sub
u, we have this. Our i component is
negative sine of u. Our j component is cosine of u. And it has no k component,
so we'll put a 0 right there. And then r sub v, no i
component, no j component, and it has 1 for
its k coefficient. And so we can just
evaluate this. And so first, we think
about the i component. Well, we ignore that
column, that row. It's going to be
cosine of u minus 0. So it's going to
be cosine of ui. And then we'll have minus
j times ignore column, ignore row negative
sine of u times 1 minus 0. So it's negative j times
negative sine of u. So it's just going to
be plus sine of uj. And then for the k, we have
this times 0 minus this times 0. So we're just going to have 0. So this is the cross product. And if we want to take
the magnitude of this, if we just take the
magnitude of this so now we're ready to take
the magnitude of this. It's going to be equal
to the magnitude of this is going to be equal to
the square root of cosine of u squared plus
sine of u squared. There is no k component. And from the unit circle,
this is the most basic trig identity. This is just going
to be equal to 1. And so we have this part right
over here just simplifies to 1, which is nice. And dS simplifies to du dv
for at least this surface. And so now we are
ready to attempt to evaluate the integral. But I'm almost
running out of time, so I will do that
in the next video. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex3 part 2: Evaluating the outside surface | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Where we left off
in the last video, we were focused on surface
two, this blue kind of outside, or I guess the blue side of our
little kind of chopped cylinder that we were dealing with. And we found a decent
parametrization. And then given that
parametrization, we were able to come up
with dS for that surface, for surface two. It just simplified, all this
business simplified to 1. So it just equalled du dv. And so now we are ready to
evaluate the surface integral. This surface integral
right over here. We're ready to evaluate
the surface integral over surface two of zdS. And it's going to be equal to
a double integral over u and v. So let's write this. I'm going to do two
different colors for the different
variables of integration. So yellow for one and
maybe purple for the other. And we're taking
the integral of z. And in our parametrization,
z is equal to v. So this right over here
is the same thing as v. So we can write v
right over there. And we already saw that dS
is the same thing as du dv. Or we could even
write that is dv du. We could just switch the
order right over there. And I'm going to choose to
integrate with respect to dv first, to do dv on
the inside integral, and then do du on
the outside integral. And the reason why I'm choosing
to integrate with respect to v first is based on the
bounds of our parameters. v is bounded on
the low end by 0. But on the high
end, it's bounded by essentially a function of u. Its upper bound changes. Because you see right
over here, depending where we are, depending on what
our x value is, essentially we have a different height
that we need to get to. And since it's a
function of u, we can integrate with respect to
v. Our boundaries are going to be 0 and 1 minus cosine of u. This, all of this
business in magenta, will give us a function of u. And then we'll be able to
integrate with respect to u. And u just goes from 0 to 2 pi. So that will give us a nice
straightforward number, assuming all of
this works out OK. And so this is simplified to
a straight-up double integral. And now we're ready to compute. And so let me write
the outside part. The outside part is
from 0 to 2 pi, is du. And so the inside part,
the antiderivative of v is v squared over 2. And we're going to evaluate that
from 0 to 1 minus cosine of u. And so this is going to
be equal to, once again, the outside integral is 0 2 pi. I'll write du right over here. And so this is going to
be equal to all of this. Let me just write 1/2. And, actually, I can even
write the 1/2 out here. I'll just write 1/2 times
1 minus cosine u squared. Well that's just going to be 1
squared minus 2 times a product of both of these, so
minus 2 cosine of u. Actually, let me give myself
a little bit more real estate here. 1 minus 2 cosine of
u plus cosine of u squared minus this
thing evaluated at 0, which is just going to be 0. So we just get that
right over there. And then we have du. And so now we can evaluate this. We can integrate this
with respect to u. So let's do that. So the answer
and I'll just let me just take the
1/2 on the outside just to simplify things. So we have the 1/2 out here. And so if you take
the antiderivative of this with respect to u, you
still have this 1/2 out front. So this is equal to 1/2. And we're going to take
the antiderivative. So let's do it carefully. Actually let me just
simplify it so it's easier to take the antiderivative. So it's going to be
1/2 times the integral. I'll break this up into
three different integrals. 1/2 times the integral
from 0 to 2 pi of 1 du, which is just du minus
2 times the integral from 0 to 2 pi of cosine of u du. That's this term
right over here. Plus the integral from 0 to
2 pi of cosine squared u. And cosine squared
u, it's not so easy to take the
antiderivative of that. So we'll use one of
our trig identities. I always forget the formal name. I just think of it as
the one that takes us from cosine squared
to cosine of 2u. So this trig identity,
this thing right over here is the same thing. This comes straight out
of our trigonometry class. This is 1/2 plus 1/2
cosine of 2 theta, or I should say [? dot ?]
theta, cosine of 2u. So this last integral
right over here, I can rewrite it as, I'll just
rewrite in that same color, actually. 1/2 plus 1/2 cosine of 2u. And then we have our final du. And now let me
close the brackets. And all of that is times 1/2. So this thing right over
here, cosine of squared u, just a trig identity,
takes us to that. Now this is pretty
easy to evaluate. The antiderivative
of this is just going to be u evaluated
at 2 pi and 0. So it, essentially let
me just write it out. This part right
over here is just u evaluated from 0 to 2 pi. It's 2 pi minus 0. It just gets evaluated
and we get 2 pi. So out front, you have your
1/2 and then times 2 pi. And then this right over
here, the antiderivative, this is going to
be equal to minus 2 times the antiderivative
of cosine of u. Well that's just sine of u
evaluated from 0 to 2 pi. Well sine of 2 pi is 0. Sine of 0 is 0. So this whole thing is
going to evaluate to 0. So we could say minus 0. And then we take
the antiderivative of this right over here. The antiderivative
of this is going to be the antiderivative
of 1/2 is 1/2 u. And the antiderivative
of 1/2 cosine of 2u, well if we had a 2
out front here, then that would be the
derivative of sine of 2u. But we don't have a 2 out here. But we can add a 2. Let me actually
write it this way. We can add a 2 right over
here, and then divide by a 2. We can add a 2 and that's
a little bit too confusing. Let me make it very clear. 1/2 cosine of 2u is
equal to 1/2 times 1/2 let me write it this way is
equal to 1/4 times 2 cosine 2u. These are the exact
same quantities. And the reason why I wrote it
this way is this is clearly this is the derivative
of sine of 2u. So when you take the
antiderivative of this, it's the same thing
as plus do it in that same color
plus 1/4 sine of 2u. And we're going to evaluate
that from 0 to 2 pi. And you could
confirm for yourself. You take the derivative of this. You do the chain rule. You get the 2 out front. 2 times 1/4 gives you 1/2. And the derivative of sine
of 2u with respect to 2u is cosine of 2u. Now we need to evaluate
this at 2 pi and at 0. When you evaluate it at 2 pi,
you get have 1/2 times 2 pi, which is pi. So this is plus pi plus 1/4
times sine of 2 times 2 pi, sine of 4 pi. That's just going to be 0. So this is going
to evaluate to 0. And then minus 1/2 times 0. And then 1/4 sine of 2 times 0. This is all going to be
0 when you put 0 there. So this whole thing
of value is just 2 pi. And we're in the home stretch
at least for surface two. And I'll switch back to
surface two's color now, now that we're near the end. So this, the surface
integral for surface two is just going to be 1/2
times 2 pi minus 0 plus pi. So it's 1/2 times 3 pi,
which is equal to we can have our drum roll, or
I guess our mini drum roll since we're not really done with
the entire problem right now. But it's equal to 3 pi over 2. So we're making
pretty good headway. This was 0. And now this part right
over here is 3 pi over 2. And in the next video we will
try to tackle surface three. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex3 part 3: Top surface | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
- [Instructor] We're
now in the home stretch. We just need to evaluate
this third surface integral, which is over this top part
of our little chopped cylinder right over here. So let's try to think
of a parameterization, and let me just copy and
paste this entire drawing, just so that I can use it down below as we parameterize it. So let me copy it, copy, and
then go all the way down here and let me paste it. Let me paste it, okay, that is
our shape again, our surface. And then we go to the layer
that I wanted to get on. And then let me start,
let's start evaluating it. So what we wanna care
about is the integral over surface three of z d s. And surface three here, we
see that the x and y values, and since you take on all
the possible x and y values, inside of the unit circle,
including the boundary, and then the z values
are gonna be a function of the x values. We know that this plane, that this top surface right over here, S3, it is a subset of the plane z. Z is equal to one minus x. It's the subset that's kind
of above the unit circle in the xy-plane, or kind of the subset that intersects with our
cylinder and kind of chops it. So let's think about x and y's first. Let's think about it in
terms of polar coordinates because that's probably the
easiest way to think about it. I'm gonna redraw kind of a top view. So I'm gonna redraw a top
view, so that is my y-axis and this is my x-axis. X-axis. And the x's and y's can take on any value, they said you have to
fill the unit circle. So if you were to kind of
project this top surface down onto the xy-plane, you would
get this orange surface, that bottom surface,
which looked like this. It was essentially the
unit circle just like that. And I'm gonna redraw it a
little bit neater than that. I can do a better job, so
that would be, all right. So let me draw the unit
circle as neatly as I can. So there's my unit circle. And so we can have one parameter. We can have one parameter
that essentially says how far around the unit
circle we're going. Essentially that would be our angle and let's use theta, 'cause
that's, well just for fun. We haven't used theta as a parameter yet. That's theta, but if we had x's and y's as just a function of theta
and we had a fixed radius, that would essentially
just give us the points on the outside of the unit circle. But we need to be able
to have all of the xy's that're outside and
inside the unit circle. So we actually have to
have two parameters. We need to not only vary this angle, but we also need to vary the radius. So we would wanna trace out
the outside of that unit circle and maybe we'd wanna
shorten it a little bit. And then trace it out again. And then shorten it some more. And then trace it out again. And so you wanna actually
have a variable radius as well so that you can have how
far out you're going. You could call that r. So for example if r is fixed and you change your ranges of theta, then you would essentially
get all of those points right over there and you would
do that for all of the r's and from r zero all the way to r one and you would essentially fill
up the entire unit circle. Let's do that, so r is going
to go between zero and one. R is going to be between zero and one. And our theta, our theta's
gonna go all the way around. So our theta is going to
go between zero and two pi. This is, lemme write this down, I wrote zero instead of theta. Our theta is going to be
greater than or equal to zero, less than or equal to two pi. And now we're ready to parameterize it. X of r and theta is going to be equal to, so whatever r is, it's
going to be r cosine theta. So x is going to be r cosine theta. Y is going to be r sine theta. That's going to be the y value. R sine theta. And now z is essentially
just a function of x. Z is going to be equal to one minus x, but x is just r cosine theta. So there you have it. We have our parameterization of this surface right over here. The x's and y's can take all
the values on the unit circle, but then the z is up here
based on a function of, well based on really on a function of x. It's one minus x. So that would give us all
of the possible points right over here on the surface. You pick an x and y and then
the z is going to pop us right here someplace on that surface. And we can write it as a
position vector function. Instead of calling that
position vector function r, since we've already used r for radius, I will call it, I don't
know, let's call it, I'm just gonna pick a random letter here, let's call it p for
position vector function. And so p, our surface p
is, we can write it as, actually no why don't I
just call it surface three. So surface three, surface three, I'll do it in that same purple color too, just so we know we're talking about this, surface three as a
position vector function, as a function of theta and r,
maybe I'll write r and theta 'cause that's how I think of things. R and theta is going to be
equal to r cosine theta i plus r sine of theta j plus
one minus r cosine theta, need to get some real estate here, one minus r cosine of theta k. One minus r cosine of theta k. And now we are ready to start
doing all of the business of evaluating the actual surface integral. So the first thing we need to
do is take the cross product of this, the partial of
this with respect to r, and the partial of this
with respect to theta. Let's just get down to business. Let's take the cross product,
let's take the cross product and so we have our i unit vector,
we have our j unit vector, and we have our k unit vector. And this might get a little bit involved but we'll try our best
to just work through it. Give myself a little bit more space. And so the partial of
this with respect to r, so let's take the partial
of this with respect to r, I'll do it in blue, the partial
of this with respect to r, the partial of this with respect
to r is just cosine theta i so this is just cosine theta, I said I was gonna do it in
blue and that's not blue, so this is going to be
cosine, cosine theta. The partial of this with
respect to r is sine theta. Sine theta. And the partial of this
term right over here with respect to r is
negative cosine theta. Negative cosine theta. Now let's take the partial
with respect to theta. The partial of this with respect to theta is negative r sine of theta. Negative r sine of theta. The partial of this with respect
to theta is r cosine theta. R cosine theta. And the partial here, this is zero, and then this would be
negative r sine theta. Negative r, oh no let me be careful. This is going to be, you have a negative r so the derivative of cosine
theta with respect to theta is negative sine theta. So the negatives are gonna cancel out and so you're going to have
r, r sine, r sine theta. And now we can actually
evaluate that this determinant to figure out the cross product of the partial of this with respect to r and the partial of this
with respect to theta. I'm not writing it down, just to kind of save
some real estate here. And so we have, actually
maybe I will write it down just to be clear what we're doing. The partial of s three
with respect to r crossed with the partial of s three with respect to theta is equal to, now our i component is gonna be sine theta times r sine theta, so that's going to be
r sine squared theta, minus r cosine theta times
negative cosine theta. So that's plus r cosine squared theta. All of that times i, and you already, a simplification might be
popping out here at you, and then you have minus the j component. The j component is gonna be
cosine theta times r sine theta. So it's r cosine theta sine theta. And then we're gonna subtract from that. See the negative signs cancel out. So you're gonna subtract
r sine theta cosine theta, or r cosine theta sine theta. Well this is interesting because these are the
negatives of each other. R cosine theta sine theta minus
r cosine theta sine theta. This just evaluates to zero. So we have no j component. And then finally for our k component, we have cosine theta times r cosine theta. So we have r cosine squared theta minus r sine theta times sine theta. Or minus negative r sine
theta times sine theta. So this would give you a negative but we're gonna have to subtract until it gives you a positive. So plus r sine squared theta k. And so this simplifies quite nicely because this is going to be equal to, this term up here you can factor out an r. This is r times the sine squared theta plus cosine squared theta, which is just, that part simplifies to one
so that's just r times i. So this is equal to r times i. And we do the same thing over here. This also simplifies. This is actually the same thing. This also simplifies to r. So this whole thing simplifies,
lemme write it this way, this is also r sine squared
theta plus cosine squared theta. Also simplifies to r. So you have r times k, and
so if you want the magnitude of this business, so let me make it clear, so the magnitude, we'll
go back to the magenta, the magnitude of, I don't
feel like rewriting it all, just copy and paste it. Edit copy and paste. The magnitude of all of
this business is going to be equal to the square root of this squared, which is r squared, plus this
squared, which is r squared, which simplifies to,
this is two r squared. So you take the square
root of both of those, you get the square root of two times r. So this is equal to the
square root of two times, it would be the absolute value of r but we know that r only
takes on positive values. R only takes on positive values so it's the square root of two times r, which is very nice because
now we can evaluate d s. D s is going to be this
business times d r d theta. So let's do it. So our surface integral, the thing that we were dealing
with from the beginning, that thing right over there. Our surface integral, the
surface s three, of z d s is now equal to, so I'm gonna
use different colors for the different
variables of integration, so one on the outside, and
then I'll do one on the inside, I'll do the inside one in pink. Z is equal to one minus r cosine theta. So the z is equal to one
minus r cosine theta. It involves both so I'll
use a different color. Minus r cosine theta. And then I just have to integrate relative to both of the variables. One minus r cosine theta, oh
no I have to do the times d s. D s is this thing, it's this thing, times d theta d, d r. So let's see, let's write this out. Times square root of two r,
so let's write that down, so this times the square root of two r, times the square root of two, and we can write the square
root of two out front since it's a constant
so lemme just do that, simplifies things. Square root of two times
r, and now d theta d r. Or we can write d r d theta, either way. So let's do that. D, let's do d r d theta. So d r d theta, we could do it either way, it's gonna be about the
same level of complexity. And so first we're going to
integrate with respect to r, and lemme do the colors
the same way, actually. So d r, d theta. If I've got colors I
might as well use them. And actually I just realized
that I'm way out of time. So actually, let me continue
this in the next video. We'll set up the boundaries of integration and then just evaluate it. 

Transcript for: Surface integral ex3 part 4: Home stretch | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
So I stopped abruptly 12
minutes into the last video because 12 minutes was too long. I needed a break. But where we left off, we
were in the home stretch. We were evaluating the
third surface integral. And we were setting it up as
a double integral with respect to r and theta. And we just had to
set up the bounds. And we know that r takes
on values between 0 and 1. And theta takes on values
between 0 and 2 pi. So r, we're going to integrate
with respect to r first. r takes on values
between 0 and 1. And theta takes on values
between 0 and 2 pi. And so now we are
ready to integrate. So let's do the first part. Let's do this inside
part right over here. And I'm just going to
rewrite the outside part. So this is going
to be equal to we have our square root of 2
times the integral from 0 to 2 pi of and we have
d theta right over here. So that's the outside. This inside part
right over here, we can rewrite it as
if we distribute the r. It's r minus r squared
cosine of theta. Now we're going to
integrate with respect to r. So when we integrate with
respect to r, cosine of theta is just a constant. So if you integrate
this with respect to r, you get and I'll do
it in that pink color if you integrate with respect
to r, the antiderivative of r is r squared over 2. And the antiderivative
of r squared is r cubed over 3 minus r
cubed over 3 cosine theta. This is just a constant. And we're going to
evaluate that from 0 to 1. So when you would
evaluate it at 1, you get 1/2 minus
1/3 cosine theta. So you get 1/2 I'll just
do it right over here 1/2 minus 1/3 cosine theta. And then minus both of
these evaluated at 0, well those are
just going to be 0. 0 squared minus 0
squared times whatever. It's all going to be 0. So this business
right over here just evaluates to 1/2 minus
1/3 cosine of theta. And so we get the integral. This is all going
to be equal now to the square root of 2 times
the integral from theta 0 to 2 pi of 1/2 minus 1/3
cosine of theta d theta. And this is equal to
square root of 2 times the antiderivative
of 1/2 is 1/2 theta. And the antiderivative of
cosine theta is sine theta. So minus 1/3 sine theta. And we're evaluating
it from 0 to 2 pi. When you evaluate
these at 2 pi, you have let me just write it all
out this is the home stretch. I don't want to make
a careless mistake. We have square root of 2 times
let's evaluate it at 2 pi 1/2 times 2 pi is pi minus
1/3 times sine of 2 pi well that's just going to be 0. And when you evaluate it
at 0, 1/2 times 0 is 0. Sine of 0 is 0. So that all comes out to 0. So all of this business
simplifies to pi. And we are done. We've evaluated surface three. It is square root of 2, or
the third surface integral, or the surface integral
over surface three. It is square root of 2 pi. And we are done. So this part right over
here is square root 2, or root 2, times pi. So this entire surface
integral that we started like 80 videos ago, evaluates
to the orange part evaluates to 0. The blue part, 3 pi over 2. And then the magenta part
is square root of 2 pi. So we're left with 3 pi over
2 plus the square root of 2 pi is the value of our
original surface integral. 

Transcript for: Conceptual understanding of flux in three dimensions | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Let's say we are operating... ...in three dimensions. And I have a function, rho, ...which is a function of (x,y,z)... ...and it gives us the mass density... ...at any point in three dimensions, ...of some fluid. Some particular fluid. Maybe it's a gas, or a fluid, ...water. Who knows what it is? Some type of substance. It gives us the mass density... ...at any point in three dimensions. And let's say we have another... ...function. This is a scalar function. It just gives us a number... ...for any point in 3D. And then, let's say we have another function, v, ...which is a vector function. It gives us a vector... ...for any point in three dimensions. And this right over here tells us... ...the velocity of that same... ...the velocity of that same fluid or gas... ...or whatever we're talking about. Now let's imagine another function. And this might all look a little bit familiar, because we did it... We went through a very similar exercise... ...in two dimensions when we talked about line integrals. Now we're just extending it to three dimensions. Let's say we have a function, f. Let's say we have a function, f, ...and it is equal to... ...the product... ...the product of rho and v. So for any point in (x,y,z)... ...this will give us a vector, and then... ...we'll multiply it times this scalar right over here... ...for that same point in three dimensions. So it's equal to... ...rho times v. Let me use the same color... ...that I used for v before. And there's a couple of ways you could conceptualize this, ...so you could view this as... Obviously it maintains the direction of the velocity, ...but now its magnitude... One way to think about it is... ...kind of the momentum density. And if that doesn't make too much sense, ...you don't have to worry too much about it. Hopefully, as we use these two functions, ...and we talk think a little bit more... ...about them relative to a surface, ...it'll make a little bit more conceptual sense. Now, what I want to do... ...is think about what it means... ...what it means... ...given this function, f, ...to evaluate the surface integral... ...over some surface... So we're going to evaluate over some surface. We're going to evaluate f... We're going to evaluate f dot n, ...where n is the unit normal vector at every ...at each point on that surface, ...dS. d-surface. So let's think about what this is saying. So first, let me draw my axes. So I have my z-axis. z-axis... This could be my... Let's make that... Let's make that my x-axis. And let's say that this right over here... ...is my y-axis. And let's say my surface... ...I'll use that same color... My surface looks something like that. So that is my surface. That is the surface in question. That is S. Now let's think about the units, ...and hopefully that'll give us conceptual understanding... ...of what this thing right over here is measuring. It's completely analogous to... ...what we did in the two-dimensional case... ...with the line integrals. So we have a dS. A dS is a little chunk of area... ...of that surface. So that is dS. So this is going to be area. And if we want to break... This is... We want to pick particular units... This could be square... This could be square meters. And I think when we do... ...particular units, it starts to make... ...a little bit more concrete sense. Now, the normal vector... ...at that dS... The normal vector is going to... ...point right out of it. It's literally normal to that plane. It's literally normal to that plane. It has a magnitude 1. So that is our unit normal vector. And f is defined throughout this three-dimensional space. You give me any (x,y,z), ...I'll know its mass density, ...I'll know its velocity, ...and I'll get some f. I'll get some f at any point... ...at any point in three-dimensional space, ...including on the surface. Including right over here. So right over here, f might look... ...f might look something like this. So that is f right at that point. Right at that point. So what does all of this mean? Well when you take the dot product... ...of two vectors, this is essentially saying, "How much do they go together?" And since n is a unit vector, ...since it has a magnitude 1, ...it's this is essentially saying.. "What is..." "What is the magnitude... ...of the component of f... ...that's going in the direction of n?" Or the component Or... "What is the magnitude of the... ...component of f that is... ...normal to the surface?" Or "How much of f is normal... ...to the surface?" So the component of f that is... ...normal to the surface... ...might look something like... ...might look something... ...like that. Might look something like that. And this right over here... ...will essentially just give... ...the magnitude of that. And it's just going to... It's just going to keep the units of f. n, right over here, just specifies... ...a direction. It has no units associated with it. It's dimensionless. f's units are going to be... ...units of mass density, So it could be... It's going to be... Let's say it could be... ...kilogram per meter-cubed. That's... Well that's actually just the rho part. So it's mass density times velocity. Times meters per second. Let me write it in those colors... ...so we have... ...clear what's happening here. So the units of f... ...are going to be the units of rho... ...which are going to be... ...kilogram per cubic meter... That's mass density. ...times the units of v... ...which is meters per second. Meters per second. And we're going to multiply that times meters squared. So what you have is... You have a meter and then... ...a meter squared in the numerator... That's meters cubed in the numerator. And meters cubed in the denominator. That, that, that cancels out. And so the units that we get for this... The units that we get for this... ...are kilogram per second. And so the way to conceptualize it... Given how we've defined f... ...when we say what we say f represents... The way to conceptualize this... This is saying, "How much mass..." "How much mass, given this mass density, ...this velocity, is going directly... ...out of this little dS, ...this little... ...'infinitesimally' chunk of surface... ...in a given amount of time?" And then if we were to add up... ...all of the dS-es, ...and this is what essentially that surface integral is, ...we're essentially saying, "How much mass, ...in kilograms per second, ...that's what we picked... How much mass... ...is traveling across this surface... ...at any given moment in time?" And this is really the same idea we do with... ...the line integrals. This is essentially the flux through a two-dimensional surface. So this is... ...the flux through a 2D surface. And this isn't like... ...some crazy, abstract thing. I mean, you could imagine... You know, you could imagine... ...something like water vapor in your bathroom. Water vapor in your bathroom. And I like to imagine that, ...because that's actually visible, ...especially when sunlight is shining through it. And we've all seen water vapor... ...through a... ...water vapor in our bathroom when... ...you have a ray of sunlight, and you can see... ...how the particles... ...how the particles are traveling. And you see they have a certain density... ...at different points. And so you could imagine... You could imagine... You care about the surface... ...the surface of your... Maybe you have a window. Maybe you have a window in the bathroom. So you have a window. And so, if you were... If the surface was the window, ...and the window... And let's say the window's open, ...so it's kind of a... There's nothing physical there. It's just kind of a... ...a rectangular surface that... ...things can pass freely through, ...if and f was essentially... ...the mass density of the water vapor times... ...the velocity of the water vapor, ...then this thing right over here will essentially tell you... ...the mass of water vapor that is traveling... ...through that window at any given moment of time. Another way to think about it is... Imagine a... Imagine a river. And I'm going to conceptualize this river... ...as kind of a... ...just a section of the river. And I'm conceptualizing it... This is kind of... ...a river. Obviously this would be the surface... ...that we normally see. But obviously it has some depth. It's three-dimensional in nature. And so we would know the density. Maybe it's constant. You know the density, and you know the velocity... ...at any point. That's what f gives us. So that tells us... As we said, we could view that as the... ...momentum density at any given point in time. And maybe our surface is some type of a net. Our surface is some type of a net. And the net doesn't even have to be rectangular. It could be some weird-shaped net. But I'll do it in rectangular, just because it's... ...easier to draw. It's some type of net that in no way impedes the flow... ...of the fluid. Then once again, ...when you evaluate this integral, ...it would tell you the mass of fluid that is flowing... ...through that net... ...at any given moment of time. So hopefully this makes... ...a little bit of conceptual sense now. In the next few videos, ...we'll actually think about... ...how to... ...how to calculate this, ...and how we can actually represent it... ...in different ways. 

Transcript for: Constructing a unit normal vector to a surface | Multivariable Calculus | Khan Academy
Now that we hopefully have a conceptual understanding... ...of what a surface integral like this COULD represent, ...I want to think about how we can actually construct... ...a unit vector... ...a unit normal vector, at any point on the surface. And to do that, I will assume... ...that our surface can be parametrized... ...by the position vector function, r... ...and r is a function of two parameters. It's a function of u, and it is a function of v. You give me a u and a v and... ...that will essentially specify... ...a point on this two-dimensional surface right over here. It could be bent, so it kind of exists in three-dimensional space... But a u and a v will specify a given point on this surface. Now, let's think about what the directions of r... ...the partial of r with respect to... ...the partial of r with respect to u looks like... ...and what the direction of the partial of r... ...the partial of r with respect to v looks like. So let's say that we're at some... ...we're at some point. We're at some point, (u,v). So for some (u,v), if you'd find the position vector... ...it takes us to that point on the surface right over there. Now let's say that we increment u just a little bit. And as we increment u just a little bit, ...we're going to get to another point on our surface, ...and let's say that other point on the surface... ...is right over there. So what would r... What would this r_u vector look like? Well its magnitude is essentially going to be.. ...dependent on how fast it's happening, ...how fast we're moving towards that point, ...but its direction is going to be in that direction. It's going to be towards that point. It's going be along the surface. We're going from one point on the surface to another. It's essentially going to be tangent to the surface at that point. And I could draw a little bit bigger. It would look something like that. r... r_u. So I just zoomed in right over here. Now let's go back to this point. And now let's make v a little bit bigger. And let's say if we make v a little bit bigger, ...we go to this point right over here. So then our position vector, r, would point to this point. And so what would r_v look like? Well its magnitude, once again, would be dependent on... ...how fast we're going there, but the direction is what's interesting. The direction would also be tangential to the surface. We're going from one point on the surface to another... ...as we change v. So r_v might look something like that. And they're not necessarily... These two aren't necessarily perpendicular to each other. In fact, the way I drew them, they're not perpendicular. So r_v is like this, but they're both tangential to the plane. They're both essentially telling us, right at that point, ...what is the tangent? What is the slope in that... ...in the u direction, or in the v direction? Now, this is... When you have two... When you have two vectors that are... ...that are tangential to the plane, ...and they're not the same vector, these are actually... ...already specifying... ...these are already kind of determining a plane. And so you can imagine a plane that looks something like this. If you took linear combinations of these two things, ...you would get a plane that both of these would lie on. Now, we've done this before, but I'll re-visit it. What happens when I take the cross product... ...of r_u and r_v? What happens when I take the cross product? Well first, this is going to give us another vector. It's going to give us a vector... ...a vector that is perpendicular to both... ...to r_u AND r_v. Or another way to think about it is... ...this plane, that these... ...when you take the cross product... ...this plane is essentially a tangential plane... ...to the surface. And if something is going to be perpendicular... ...to both of these characters, ...it's going to have to be normal to them... ...or, it's definitely going to be perpendicular... ...to both of them, but it's going to be normal... ...to this plane. Which is essentially going to be... ...perpendicular to the surface itself. So this right over here... ...is going to be A normal vector. This is... I'll write it... Well, let me just write it this way. This is A normal vector. I'm not saying THE unit normal... I'm not saying THE normal vector, 'cause you have... ...you could have different normal vectors of... ...different magnitudes. This is A normal vector, when you take the cross product. And we can even think about what direction it's pointing in. And so when you have "something" cross "something else"... ...the easiest way I remember how to do it is... ...you point your left thumb... Oh, sorry. You point your RIGHT thumb... ...in the direction of the first vector... So, in this case, r_u. So let me see if I can... ...if I can draw this. I'm literally looking at my hand and trying to draw it. So you put your right thumb...  so this is a right-hand rule, essentially  ...in the direction of the first vector... ...and then you put your index finger in the direction of... ...the second vector... ...right over here. So this is the second vector. So that's the direction of my index finger. So my index finger is going to look something like... ...that. And then you bend... ...you bend your middle finger inward... ...and that will tell you the direction of the cross product. So if I bend my middle finger inward, ...it will look something... ...it will look something like this. And then of course, my other two fingers are just going to be... ...folded in like that, and they're not really relevant. But my other two fingers and my hand looks like that. And so that tells us the direction. The direction is going to be like that. It's going to be upward-facing. That's important, because you have normal vectors. One could... Or there's two directions of "normalcy," I guess you could say. One is going out like that... ...outwards... ...or I guess... ...in the upward direction... ...one would be going downwards, ...or going  I guess you could say  into the surface. But the way I have set it up right now, ...this would be going outwards. It would be A... It would be A normal vector... ...to the surface. Now, in order to go from A normal vector... ...to the UNIT normal vector, ...we just have to normalize it. We just have to divide this... ...by its magnitude. So now we have our drumroll. The unit vector... And it's going to essentially be... It's going to be a function of u... It's going to be... ...a function of u and v. You give me a u or a v... ...and I'll give you a... ...that unit normal vector. It is going to be equal to... ...the partial of r... ...the partial of r with respect to u... ...crossed with... ...the partial of r with respect to v... That just... Now that gives us A normal vector, but it hasn't been normalized. So we want to divide... ...by the magnitude... We want to divide by the magnitude... ...of the exact same thing. r_u crossed with r_v. And we're done! We have constructed a unit normal vector. And in future videos, we'll actually do this with concrete examples. 

