Integrals Involving Even Powers of Sine and Cosine.
this video, we saw that for a constant force work is just equal to the force times distance.
But for a variable force work is equal to the integral of force with respect to distance.
This video introduces the idea of an average value of a function.
To take the average of a finite list of numbers, we just add the numbers up and divide by n, the number of numbers.
In summation notation, we write the sum from i equals one to n of Q i all divided by n.
But defining the average value of a continuous function is a little different.
Because a function can take on infinitely many values on an interval from a to be, we could estimate the average value of the function by sampling it at a finite Li many evenly spaced x values.
I'll call them x one through x n.
And let's assume that they're spaced a distance of delta x apart, then the average value of f at these sample points is just the sum of the values of f divided by n, the number of values are in summation notation, the sum from i equals one to n of f of x i all divided by n.
This is an approximate average value of f, since we're just using n sample points.
But the approximation gets better as the number of sample points n gets bigger and bigger.
So we could define the average as the limit as n goes to infinity of the sample average.
I'd like to make this look more like a Riemann sum.
So I need to get delta x in there.
So I'm just going to multiply the top and the bottom by delta x.
And notice that n times delta x is just the length of the interval b minus a.
Now as the number of sample points goes to infinity, delta x, the distance between them goes to zero.
So I can rewrite my limit as the limit as delta x goes to zero of the sum of FX II times delta x divided by b minus a.
Now the limit of this Riemann sum in the numerator is just the integral from a to b of f of x dx.
And so the average value of the function is given by the integral on the interval from a to b divided by the length of the interval.
Notice the similarity between the formula for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a list of numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the list of numbers.
And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to n, the number of numbers in the list of numbers.
Now let's work an example.
For the function g of x equals one over one minus 5x.
On the interval from two to five.
We know that the average value of G is given by the integral from two to five of one over one minus 5x dx divided by the length of that interval.
I'm going to use use of the tuition to integrate.
So I'm going to set u equal to one minus 5x.
So d u is negative five dx.
In other words, dx is negative 1/5 times do.
Looking at my bounds of integration, when x is equal to two, u is equal to one minus five times two, which is negative nine.
And when x is equal to five, u is equal to negative 24.
substituting into my integral, I get the integral from negative nine to negative 24 of one over u times negative 1/5.
Do and that's divided by three.
Now dividing by three is same as multiplying by 1/3.
And as I integrate, I'm going to pull the negative 1/5 out, and then take the integral of one over u, that's ln of the absolute value of u, evaluated in between negative 24 and negative nine.
The absolute value signs are important here, because they prevent me from trying to take the natural log of negative numbers.
To evaluate, I get negative 1/15 times ln of 24 minus ln of nine, I can use my log rules to simplify and get negative 1/15 ln of 24 over nine, that's negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and as a decimal, that's approximately negative 0.
0654.
So I found the average value of G.
Now my next question is, does g ever achieve that average value, in other words, is there a number c in the interval from two to five for which GFC equals its average value?
Well, one way to find out is just to set GSC equal to GS average value.
In other words, set one over one minus five c equal to negative 1/15 ln of eight thirds, and try to solve for C.
There are lots of ways to solve this equation.
But I'm going to take the reciprocal of both sides, subtract one from both sides and divide by negative five.
This simplifies to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5.
What which is approximately 3.
25.
And that x value does lie inside the interval from two to five.
So we've demonstrated that g does achieve its average value over the interval.
But in fact, we could have predicted this to be true.
Gs average value has to lie somewhere between GS minimum value and maximum value on this interval.
And since G is continuous on the interval from two to five, it has to achieve every value that lies in between as minimum and maximum, including its average value.
The same argument shows that for any continuous function, the function must achieve its average value on an interval.
And this is known as the mean value theorem for integrals.
Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval from a to b, there has to be at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of c equals its average value, or, in symbols, f of c equals the integral from a to b of f of x dx divided by b minus a.
This video gave the definition of an average value of a function, and stated the mean value theorem for integrals.
If we rewrite the formula for average value a little, then we can see a geometric interpretation for average value.
The area of the box with height the average value Notice the similarity between the formula for the average value of a function and the formula for the average value of a list of numbers, the integral for the function corresponds to the summation sign for the list of numbers.
And the length of the interval B minus A for the function corresponds to n, the number of numbers in the list of numbers.
Now let's work an example.
For the function g of x equals one over one minus 5x.
On the interval from