Integration Using Trig Substitution.
equation.
But I'm going to take the reciprocal of both sides, subtract one from both sides and divide by negative five.
This simplifies to three over ln of eight thirds, plus 1/5.
What which is approximately 3.
25.
And that x value does lie inside the interval from two to five.
So we've demonstrated that g does achieve its average value over the interval.
But in fact, we could have predicted this to be true.
Gs average value has to lie somewhere between GS minimum value and maximum value on this interval.
And since G is continuous on the interval from two to five, it has to achieve every value that lies in between as minimum and maximum, including its average value.
The same argument shows that for any continuous function, the function must achieve its average value on an interval.
And this is known as the mean value theorem for integrals.
Namely, for any continuous function f of x on an interval from a to b, there has to be at least one number c, between A and B, such that f of c equals its average value, or, in symbols, f of c equals the integral from a to b of f of x dx divided by b minus a.
This video gave the definition of an average value of a function, and stated the mean value theorem for integrals.
If we rewrite the formula for average value a little, then we can see a geometric interpretation for average value.
The area of the box with height the average value is the same as the area under the curve.
This video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals.
the mean value theorem for integrals says the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b, there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value of f.
The first proof that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem.
Recall that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f defined on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two.
If we have some number l in between f of x one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between x one and x two Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now, it's possible that our function f of x might be constant on the interval from a to b.
But if that's true, then our mean value theorem for integrals holds easily.
Because f AF is just equal to that constant, which is equal to f of c for any c between A and B.
So let's assume that f is not constant.
Well, like continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value, which I'll call little m, and big M.
Now, we know that F's average value on the interval has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value.
If you don't believe this, consider the fact that all of us values on the interval have to lie between big M and little m.
And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a.
Notice that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant.
Now if I divide all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted.
Now, I just need to apply the intermediate value theorem with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my values of f of x one and f of x two.
The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two.
And therefore, for some C in my interval a b.
And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now I'm going to give a second proof for the mean value theorem for integrals.
And this time, it's going to be as a corollary to the regular mean value theorem for functions.
Recall that the mean value theorem for functions, says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value theorem for integrals.
Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is zero.
Well, g of B is the integral from a to b of our function.
Now, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x.
is the same as the area under the curve.
This video gives two proofs of the mean value theorem for integrals.
the mean value theorem for integrals says the for continuous function f of x, defined on an interval from a to b, there's some number c between A and B, such that f of c is equal to the average value of f.
The first proof that I'm going to give us is the intermediate value theorem.
Recall that the intermediate value theorem says that if we have a continuous function f defined on an interval, which I'll call x 1x, two.
If we have some number l in between f of x one and f of x two, then f has to achieve the value l somewhere between x one and x two Keeping in mind the intermediate value theorem, let's turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now, it's possible that our function f of x might be constant on the interval from a to b.
But if that's true, then our mean value theorem for integrals holds easily.
Because f AF is just equal to that constant, which is equal to f of c for any c between A and B.
So let's