Integrals of Rational Functions.
assume that f is not constant.
Well, like continuous function on a closed interval has to have a minimum value and a maximum value, which I'll call little m, and big M.
Now, we know that F's average value on the interval has to be between its maximum value and its minimum value.
If you don't believe this, consider the fact that all of us values on the interval have to lie between big M and little m.
And if we integrate this inequality, we get little m times b minus a is less than or equal to the integral of f is less than or equal to big M times b minus a.
Notice that the first and the last integrals, were just integrating a constant.
Now if I divide all three sides by b minus a, I can see that little m is less than or equal to the average value of f is less than or equal to big M as I wanted.
Now, I just need to apply the intermediate value theorem with F average as my number L and little m and big M as my values of f of x one and f of x two.
The intermediate value theorem says that F average is achieved by f of c for some C in between my x one and x two.
And therefore, for some C in my interval a b.
And that proves the mean value theorem for integrals.
Now I'm going to give a second proof for the mean value theorem for integrals.
And this time, it's going to be as a corollary to the regular mean value theorem for functions.
Recall that the mean value theorem for functions, says that if g of x is continuous on a closed interval, and differentiable on the interior of that interval, then there's some number c in the interval, such that the derivative of g at C is equal to the average rate of change of G, across the whole interval from a to b.
Let's keep the mean value theorem for functions in mind, and turn our attention back to the mean value theorem for integrals.
I'm going to define a function g of x to be the integral from a to x of f of t dt, where F is the function given to us in the statement of the mean value theorem for integrals.
Notice that g of A is just the integral from a to a, which is zero.
Well, g of B is the integral from a to b of our function.
Now, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, our function g of x is continuous and differentiable on the interval a, b, and g prime of x is equal to f of x.
And by the mean value theorem for functions, we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some number c and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below, we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach.
This shows that the mean value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our function is an integral.
And this completes the second proof of the mean value theorem for integrals.
So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different ways.
And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way.
In this video, we'll learn a technique of integration called inner By parts.
integration by parts is based on the product rule for taking derivatives.
Recall that the product rule says that when you take the derivative of a product of two functions, that's equal to the derivative of the first function times the second function, plus the first function times the derivative of the second function.
If we rearrange this formula, by solving for this last term, we get f of x times g prime of x is equal to f of x g of x prime minus f prime of x g of x.
Now let's integrate both sides of this equation with respect to x.
The integral of a difference is the difference of the integrals.
So I can break up this right hand side into two integrals.
Now the integral of the derivative of f times g is just equal to f times g, by the fundamental theorem of calculus.
And I carry the rest of the formula down.
And now I have a formula relating the integral of f times g prime to the integral of f prime times G.
This formula allows us to rewrite something that might be tricky to integrate, in terms of something that's hopefully easier to integrate.
Although I've written this formula, using indefinite integrals with no bounds of integration, it would be just as easy to put on bounds of integration.
Now, the fundamental theorem tells us that the integral of the derivative is the original product of functions evaluated from A to B.
There's another version of this formula that might be a little easier to remember.
If we let u equal f of x, and v equal g of x, then do is equal to f prime of x dx using differential notation, and dv is equal to g prime of x dx.
In this notation, we can rewrite the formula as the integral of u times dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of v, d U.
since V is our G of X, and D, u is our f prime of x dx.
Again, we can include bounds of integration, if we're working with definite integrals.
This will be our key formula for this section.
and integrating using this formula is called integration by parts.
Let's use integration by parts to find the integral of x e to the x dx.
Or for formula for integration by parts, says the integral of u dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of the do.
So we need to split up our inner grand x e to the x dx into the part that we're going to call you, and a part that we're going to call dv.
One natural way to split it up is to let u equal x and dv equal e to the x dx.
But another option might be to make