Improper Integrals - Type 1.
u equal to e to the x and dv equal to x dx bar, we might decide to make you be the whole product, x e to the x and leave dv as just dx.
And by the mean value theorem for functions, we know that g prime of c has to equal g of b minus g of a over b minus a, for some number c and the interval a b, if we substitute in the three facts above, into our equation below, we get f of c is equal to the integral from a to b of f of t dt minus zero over b minus a, which is exactly the conclusion that we wanted to reach.
This shows that the mean value theorem for integrals really is the mean value theorem for functions where our function is an integral.
And this completes the second proof of the mean value theorem for integrals.
So now I've proved the mean value theorem for integrals in two different ways.
And I've used a lot of the great theorems of calculus along the way.
In this video, we'll learn a technique of integration called inner By parts.
integration by parts is based on the product rule for taking derivatives.
Recall that the product rule says that when you take the derivative of a product of two functions, that's equal to the derivative of the first function times the second function, plus the first function times the derivative of the second function.
If we rearrange this formula, by solving for this last term, we get f of x times g prime of x is equal to f of x g of x prime minus f prime of x g of x.
Now let's integrate both sides of this equation with respect to x.
The integral of a difference is the difference of the integrals.
So I can break up this right hand side into two integrals.
Now the integral of the derivative of f times g is just equal to f times g, by the fundamental theorem of calculus.
And I carry the rest of the formula down.
And now I have a formula relating the integral of f times g prime to the integral of f prime times G.
This formula allows us to rewrite something that might be tricky to integrate, in terms of something that's hopefully easier to integrate.
Although I've written this formula, using indefinite integrals with no bounds of integration, it would be just as easy to put on bounds of integration.
Now, the fundamental theorem tells us that the integral of the derivative is the original product of functions evaluated from A to B.
There's another version of this formula that might be a little easier to remember.
If we let u equal f of x, and v equal g of x, then do is equal to f prime of x dx using differential notation, and dv is equal to g prime of x dx.
In this notation, we can rewrite the formula as the integral of u times dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of v, d U.
since V is our G of X, and D, u is our f prime of x dx.
Again, we can include bounds of integration, if we're working with definite integrals.
This will be our key formula for this section.
and integrating using this formula is called integration by parts.
Let's use integration by parts to find the integral of x e to the x dx.
Or for formula for integration by parts, says the integral of u dv is equal to u times v minus the integral of the do.
So we need to split up our inner grand x e to the x dx into the part that we're going to call you, and a part that we're going to call dv.
One natural way to split it up is to let u equal x and dv equal e to the x dx.
But another option might be to make u equal to e to the x and dv equal to x dx bar, we might decide to make you be the whole product, x e to the x and leave dv as just dx.
Whatever choice we make, we need a u times dv to be our entire integrand here, and we need dx to be part of dv in order to use proper differential notation.
Let's try using the first choice first.
If u is equal to x, then d u is equal to dx.
And if dv is e to the x dx, then we can find V by integrating this and the integral of e to the x dx is e to the x.
plugging into our integration by parts formula, we have the integral of u dv that's x, e to the x dx is equal to u times v x into dx minus the integral of vdu.
That's e to the x dx.
Well, this is looking very promising, because I know how to integrate e to the x