The Comparison Theorem for Integrals.
Whatever choice we make, we need a u times dv to be our entire integrand here, and we need dx to be part of dv in order to use proper differential notation.
Let's try using the first choice first.
If u is equal to x, then d u is equal to dx.
And if dv is e to the x dx, then we can find V by integrating this and the integral of e to the x dx is e to the x.
plugging into our integration by parts formula, we have the integral of u dv that's x, e to the x dx is equal to u times v x into dx minus the integral of vdu.
That's e to the x dx.
Well, this is looking very promising, because I know how to integrate e to the x dx.
It's just e to the x plus a constant of integration.
And so integration by part has allowed us to compute our integral, let's check our answer by taking the derivative of what we got the derivative of x, e to the x minus e to the x plus C is going to be the derivative of x, that's one, times e to the x plus x times the derivative of e to the x, which is dx, minus the derivative of iliacs, which is again, the x plus the derivative of C, which is just zero.
And since this term and this term cancel out, we're left with x e to the x, which is exactly what we started out with as our integrand.
So we've checked that our work is correct.
Notice that in order to take the derivative of our answer, we ended up having to use the product rule.
And that's no coincidence, because the formula for integration by parts is really just the product rule used in reverse.
So we were successful in computing this integral using our first choice of u and dv.
But before we leave this problem, let's see what would have happened if we used a different choice.
Instead, if we used you've equal to either the X and dv equal to x dx, if we done that, then we would have gotten do to be either the x dx, and we would have computed V by integrating x dx two that get x squared over two.
plugging this into our formula for integration by parts, we would get the integral of udv, that's e to the x times x dx is equal to u times v, that's e to the x times x squared over two, minus the integral of vdu.
That's x squared over two times e to the x, dx.
Now in order to go any further, we need to be able to compute the integral of x squared over two times e to the x dx.
dividing by two poses no problem, that's just a constant, but the integral of x squared e to the x that's more complicated than the integral of e to the x times x that we started with.
So we're going the wrong direction here.
And this turns out to be a poor choice of u and dv.
I'll let you check that the third choice of u and dv that I suggested also ends up making things more complicated instead of simpler.
So the first choice turned out to be the best choice for you, and dv.
integration by parts works by replacing an integral of the form u dv by the equivalent expression, u times v minus the integral of vdu.
That's hopefully easier to compute.
There are a lot of trig identities that come in handy when you're doing calculus.
But the good news is, if you're willing to do a little bit of algebra, there are only a few that you really have to memorize.
In this video, I'll tell you my three favorite trig identities, and show you how to derive a bunch more with very little effort from these three.
So I'm going to tell you the three trig identities that I think everybody should know.
Fortunately, all three of them are very easy to remember.
The first one is the Pythagorean identity.
That's the identity that says sine squared of theta plus cosine squared of theta is equal to one.
That one's easy to remember, because it's really just the Pythagorean theorem for triangles in the context of the unit circle.
If I draw a right triangle with angle theta on a unit circle, it's hi partners has length one, because a unit circle means a circle of radius one.
The base of this triangle has length cosine of theta, because by definition, cosine of theta is the x coordinate of the point on the unit circle at angle theta.
Similarly, the height of the triangle is sine of theta, because sine of theta means the y coordinate on the unit circle.
So by the Pythagorean theorem for right triangles, we know that sine theta squared plus cosine theta squared equals one, which is exactly the bit beggary and identity.
The second identities that everybody should know are the even and odd identities.
I guess technically, these are two different identities but they go together, so I'm counting them as one.
The even identity says that cosine of negative theta is equal to cosine of Beta.
In other words, cosine is an even function.
