Sequences - More Definitions.
This video gives a geometric proof of those formulas.
There are many great proofs of the angle some formulas, but I'd like to share with you one of my favorites for those who are interested.
Alright, the angle some formulas up here, so we'll know what we're trying to prove.
To prove these formulas, let me start by drawing an angle A and angle B on top of that.
Next, I'm going to draw a line perpendicular to this middle line.
And I'm going to extend the top line until it meets that perpendicular, making a right triangle.
Finally, I'll draw a rectangle around that right triangle that just touches its vertices.
My rectangle is now divided up into four right triangles.
And I'm going to choose units of measurement, so that the high partners of my middle triangle has length one.
Now let's stop for a minute to think about the angles of these other triangles.
Since the top and the bottom edge of the rectangle are parallel lines, and this high partners is a transversal.
This angle up here must have the same measure as a plus b down here.
Also, this skinny angle here must have the same measure as a down here.
Because this angle is 180 degrees, minus 90 degrees minus this angle here.
And this angle A is also 180 degrees, the measure of the angles in a triangle minus 90 degrees minus that same angle.
So I'll label this skinny angle with a.
Next, let's figure out as many side lengths as we can.
So I'll label this skinny angle with a.
Next, let's figure out as many side lengths as we can.
Based on the middle right triangle with high partners one, we know that this side length down here must be cosine of B, since adjacent over hypotenuse is cosine B.
Similarly, this side length here must be sine of B.
Since opposite of our hypothesis is sine of B, now we see that sine of B is the hypotenuse of this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sign a time sign B.
That's because the opposite over the hypothesis of this angle has to equal sign a.
A similar argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine A time sign B.
Please pause the video and take a moment to fill in the side length of this right triangle.
And this right triangle, you should be getting sine A cosine B cosine A cosine B sine of A plus B and cosine of A plus B.
But remember, we have a rectangle here.
So the opposite sides have equal length.
This tells us that sine of A plus B has to equal sine of A cosine of B plus cosine of A sine of B, which is exactly the first angle sum formula.
Also, cosine of A plus B, which is this side length, is exactly the difference of this side length cosine A cosine B minus this side length sine of A sine B.
And that's the second angle sum formula.
So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof of the angle some formulas.
This video is about integrating trig functions that involve at least one odd power of sine or cosine.
Let's start by evaluating the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine x dx.
This integral is a good candidate for u substitution.
If we let u equal sine of x Then d u is equal to cosine of x dx.
And we can rewrite the integral as the integral of u to the fourth do this integrates easily to 1/5 times u to the fifth plus C.
And I can convert things back to x by plugging in sine of x for you, to get 1/5 sine to the fifth of x plus C.
The next integral, the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine cubed x dx can also be handled with a similar use of the tuition with a bit more work.
First, I'm going to rewrite the integral as the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine squared x times cosine of x dx.
I'm rewriting the cosine cubed of x as cosine squared of x times cosine x in the hopes that I can use cosine of x dx as my d u, like I did in the previous problem.
Now if we have d u, as cosine of x, dx, we're going to need you to be sine of x.
But unlike the previous problem, I can't just replace sine of the fourth x with you to the fourth and cosine x dx with D, U and be done.
Because I've got this cosine squared x hanging around that I need to deal with.
I wish I didn't