Monotonic and Bounded Sequences Extra.
have that cosine squared x, I wish everything else over here was just written in terms of sine.
Now, as you might realize, it's not hard for me to get my wish.
We know from the Pythagorean identity, that cosine squared of x plus sine squared of x is equal to one.
So cosine squared of x can be written as one minus sine squared x.
Making that substitution, I can now rewrite my integral entirely in terms of you.
And do now if I multiply things out, this becomes easy to integrate, I get 1/5 u to the fifth minus 1/7 u to the seventh plus C.
And I can rewrite this in terms of x.
Based on the middle right triangle with high partners one, we know that this side length down here must be cosine of B, since adjacent over hypotenuse is cosine B.
Similarly, this side length here must be sine of B.
Since opposite of our hypothesis is sine of B, now we see that sine of B is the hypotenuse of this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sign a time sign B.
That's because the opposite over the hypothesis of this angle has to equal sign a.
A similar argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine A time sign B.
Please pause the video and take a moment to fill in the side length of this right triangle.
And this right triangle, you should be getting sine A cosine B cosine A cosine B sine of A plus B and cosine of A plus B.
But remember, we have a rectangle here.
So the opposite sides have equal length.
This tells us that sine of A plus B has to equal sine of A cosine of B plus cosine of A sine of B, which is exactly the first angle sum formula.
Also, cosine of A plus B, which is this side length, is exactly the difference of this side length cosine A cosine B minus this side length sine of A sine B.
And that's the second angle sum formula.
So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof of the angle some formulas.
This video is about integrating trig functions that involve at least one odd power of sine or cosine.
Let's start by evaluating the integral of sine to the fourth x times cosine x dx.
This integral is a good candidate for u substitution.
If we let u equal sine of x Then d u is equal to cosine of x dx.
And we can rewrite the integral as the integral of u to the fourth do this integrates easily to 1/5 times u to the fifth plus C.
And I can convert things back to x by plugging in sine of x for you, 