Comparison Test for Series.
over.
Or, as in this example, it could occur on the endpoint of that interval of integration.
Now, it's possible that both of these situations could occur for the same integral.
And that's also an improper integral.
This video will focus on type one improper integrals.
A type one improper integral, asks us to integrate over an infinite interval.
To do this, we take the integral over larger and larger finite intervals and take the limit.
So for example, to find the integral from one to infinity of one over x squared dx, we'll evaluate the integral from one to some finite number T, and then take the limit as t goes off to infinity.
In symbols, we can write the limit as t goes to infinity of the integral from one to T of one over x squared dx.
Since one over x squared is the same thing as x to the minus two, we can integrate it to get negative x to the minus one evaluated between one and T, and then take that limit or rewrite this as negative one over x and evaluate on the bounds of integration.
as t goes to infinity, one over t goes to zero.
So the limit just comes from this expression, which evaluates to one.
If we think of it, the integral is representing area, this is a little surprising.
Even though we're taking the area of an infinitely long region, the area still evaluates to a finite number of one.
In this situation, we say that the improper integral converges.
So in general, the improper integral from some finite number a to infinity of f of x dx is defined as the limit as t goes to infinity of the integral from a to T of f of x dx.
We say that the integral converges if this limit exists as a finite number.
And we say that the integral diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative infinity, or if it doesn't exist.
Similarly, we evaluate the integral from negative infinity to some finite number by taking bigger and bigger intervals that extend off to negative infinity.
That is, this integral is defined as the limit as the left endpoint t goes to negative infinity of the integral from t to b of f of x dx.
We say that this integral converges if the limit exists as a finite number, and diverges otherwise.
So to evaluate the integral from negative infinity to negative one of one over x dx, we take the limit as t goes to negative infinity of the integral from t to negative one of one over x dx.
Now the integral of one over x is ln of the absolute value of x, which will need to integrate between t and negative one and take a limit.
We evaluate here we know that ln of the absolute value of negative one, that's ln of one which is zero.
A graph of ln is helpful for evaluating the rest of this expression.
as t goes to negative infinity, the absolute value of t is going to infinity.
And so ln is also going to infinity.
Therefore, our limit is actually negative infinity, and so the integral diverges.
In this video, we evaluated improper integrals Which the interval that we're integrating over is infinite by looking at the integrals over larger and larger, finite intervals and taking a limit.
This video is about type two improper integrals.
These are integrals for which the interval that we're integrating over is finite.
But the function that we're integrating goes to infinity on that interval.
To integrate a type to improper integral like this one, or this one, we integrate our function over a larger and larger sub intervals on which the function is finite.
And then we take a limit.
So in this first picture, where the function approaches infinity, as x goes to be from the left, we can call that moving endpoint T.
and evaluate the integral as the limit as that right endpoint t approaches B from the left of the integral from a to T of f of x dx.
The same definition works if f of x is going to negative infinity instead of infinity.
In the second picture here, we again want to take a limit of integrals over sub intervals on which the function is finite.
So in symbols, that says that if f goes to infinity or negative infinity, as x goes to a from the positive side, then the integral from a to b of f of x dx is going to be the limit as t goes to a from the right of the integral from t to b of f of x dx.
As an example, let's find the area under the curve y equals x over the square root of x squared minus one between the lines of x equals one and x equals two.
That area can be described as the integral from one to two of our function.
But this is an improper integral, because the function is going to infinity, as x goes to one from the right.
So we'll evaluate it by taking the limit as t goes to one from the right of the integral from t to two of the function.
I'll compute this integral using u substitution, where u is x squared minus one, and d u is 2x dx.
Since I see an x dx, in my integrand, here, I'll solve for x dx, and I get x dx is equal to one half deal.
I'm also going to change my bounds of integration, when x is equal to t.
That means u is equal to t squared minus one.
And when x is equal to two, u is two squared minus one, that's three.
So I'll rewrite my integral x dx is the same thing as one half d u, and my square