The Limit Comparison Test.
root of x squared minus one becomes a square root of u in the denominator.
Rewrite again, by pulling the one half out of the integral and rewriting the square root of u in the denominator as u to the negative one half.
Now I can integrate, I get two times you to the one half evaluated between three and t squared minus one, my one half and two cancel, and I'll plug in my bounds of integration here.
Now, as t goes to one from the right, t squared is also going to one, so t squared minus one is going to zero.
of the integral from t to negative one of one over x dx.
Now the integral of one over x is ln of the absolute value of x, which will need to integrate between t and negative one and take a limit.
We evaluate here we know that ln of the absolute value of negative one, that's ln of one which is zero.
A graph of ln is helpful for evaluating the rest of this expression.
as t goes to negative infinity, the absolute value of t is going to infinity.
And so ln is also going to infinity.
Therefore, our limit is actually negative infinity, and so the integral diverges.
In this video, we evaluated improper integrals Which the interval that we're integrating over is infinite by looking at the integrals over larger and larger, finite intervals and taking a limit.
This video is about type two improper integrals.
These are integrals for which the interval that we're integrating over is finite.
But the function that we're integrating goes to infinity on that interval.
To integrate a type to improper integral like this one, or this one, we integrate our function over a larger and larger sub intervals on which the function is finite.
And then we take a limit.
So in this first picture, where the function approaches infinity, as x goes to be from the left, we can call that moving endpoint T.
and evaluate the integral as the limit as that right endpoint t approaches B from the left of the integral from a to T of f of x dx.
The same definition works if f of x is going to negative infinity instead of infinity.
In the second picture here, we again want to take a limit of integrals over sub intervals on which the function is finite.
So in symbols, that says that if f goes to infinity or negative infinity, as x goes to a from the positive side, then the integral from a to b of f of x dx is going to be the limit as t goes to a from the right of the integral from t to b of f of x dx.
As an example, let's find the area under the curve y equals x over the square root of x squared minus one between the lines of x equals one and x equals two.
That area can be described as the integral from one to two of our function.
But this is an improper integral, because the function is going to infinity, as x goes to one from the right.
So we'll evaluate it by taking the limit as t goes to one from the right of the integral from t to two of the function.
I'll compute this integral using u substitution, where u is x squared minus one, and d u is 2x dx.
Since I see an x dx, in my integrand, here, I'll solve for x dx, and I get x dx is equal to one half deal.
I'm also going to change my bounds of integration, when x is equal to t.
That means u is equal to t squared minus one.
And when x is equal to two, u is two squared minus one, that's three.
So I'll rewrite my integral x dx is the same thing as one half d u, and my square root of x squared minus one becomes a square root of u in the denominator.
Rewrite again, by pulling the one half out of the integral and rewriting the square root of u in the denominator as u to the negative one half.
Now I can integrate, I get two times you to the one half evaluated between three and t squared minus one, my one half and two cancel, and I'll plug in my bounds of integration here.
Now, as t goes to one from the right, t squared is also going to one, so t squared minus one is going to zero.
Therefore, my limit is just three to the one half, or square root of three.
And that's the area underneath my curve.
This video was about type two improper integrals, and how