The Ratio Test.
A sequence is a list of numbers in a particular order, the sequence 314159 and So on is a sequence that gives the digits of pi.
A sequence is sometimes described abstractly, with letters in place of numbers, a sub one, a sub two, a sub three, and so on.
Or more concisely, by writing a sub n with these curly brackets.
Here, we're told that the index n ranges from one all the way up towards infinity.
Sometimes the sequence is written just a sub n with curly brackets.
Here, it's implied that n ranges through all positive integers.
For these sequences, given by formulas, let's write out the first few terms.
We start with n equals one, and we get a sub one is three times one plus one over one plus two factorial.
That is, for over three factorial.
Recall that three factorial means that we start with three and then multiply with consecutive numbers all the way down to one, this simplifies to four, six, or two thirds.
To find the next term, a sub two, we plug in two for add, that's seven over four factorial, which is 720 fourths.
Similarly, a sub three is 10, over five factorial, which is 10 over 120, or 112.
So the first three terms of the sequence are two thirds, 720, fourths, and 112.
For the second example, we're asked to start with K equals two.
So I'll call the first term, a sub two, and just plug in two for K, which is five ninths.
Since negative one squared is positive one.
Plugging in K equals three, we get negative 6/27, or to negative two nights.
For as of four, we again get a positive number, since negative one to the fourth is positive.
And in fact, as we keep writing down terms, they're going to alternate between negative numbers and positive numbers, because of the negative one to the K in the definition.
Sometimes, the nth term of a sequence is defined indirectly, in terms of previous terms.
This is called a recursive formula.
To write out the first few terms of this recursive sequence, we're told that a sub one equals two, to find a sub two, we just use the recursive formula for minus one over a sub one.
Since a sub one is two, that's four minus a half, or seven half, defined a sub three, we just apply the recursive formula again, four minus one over seven has simplifies to 26/7.
Sometimes as possible, describe a sequence with either a recursive formula, or a closed form non recursive formula.
For example, if I look at the sequence 246 810, I can describe that recursively by saying a sub one is two, and each a sub n is equal to a sub n minus one plus two.
Or I can describe as a closed form expression by saying the sequence is of the form two times n, where n starts at one.
Now let's practice writing out a formula for the general term, a sub n of a sequence.
For this first sequence, notice that each term is three more than the previous term.
So this is like a linear function with slope three, each time that n goes up by one, our ace events go up by three.
And so I can write a sub n is three times n plus b, where B functions like my y intercept and a linear equation, to find B, I can plug in seven, four, a sub one that corresponds to an N value of one, and I get that B has to equal four.
So my general formula is three times n plus four, where n starts at one.
I can check this by plugging in a few values of n, like we did in the previous example, just to make sure it works.
Notice that it would also be possible to write this as three times n plus seven If we're willing to start with n equals zero instead of one, if we let n start with zero, then our first term functions like our y intercept.
This is an example of an arithmetic sequence, a sequence for which consecutive terms have the same common difference.
And in general, if A is the first term, and d is the common difference than an arithmetic sequence has the form d times k plus a, if our index is K and starts at zero, like it did over here.
