Power Series as Functions.
squared x over x times the limit of something that goes to one.
So I once again have a zero over zero and determinant form.
And I can apply lopatok rule yet again, taking the derivative of the top, I get negative two sine x, cosine of x, and the derivative, the bottom is just one.
Now I'm in a good position just to evaluate the limit by plugging in zero for x in the numerator, I get negative two times zero times one, the denominator is just one, so my final limit is zero.
In this limit, we have a battle of forces.
As x is going to infinity, one over x is going to zero.
So one plus one over x is going to one, but the exponent x is going to infinity, it's hard to tell what's going to happen here.
If we had one, to any finite number, that would be one.
But anything slightly bigger than one, as we raise it to have bigger and bigger powers, we would expect to get infinity.
In this example, we want to evaluate the limit of a product.
Notice that as x goes to zero from the positive side, sine x goes to zero, and ln x goes to negative infinity.
Remember the graph of y equals ln x.
So this is actually a zero times infinity indeterminate form.
Even though the second factor is going to negative infinity, we still call it a zero times infinity and indeterminate form, you can think of the Infinity here as standing for either positive or negative infinity.
It's indeterminate.
Because as x goes to zero, the sine x factor is pulling the product towards zero, while the ln x factor is pulling the product towards large negative numbers.
And it's hard to predict what the limit of the product will actually be.
But the great thing is, I can actually rewrite this product to look like an infinity over infinity and determinant form, or a zero over zero and determinant form.
Instead of sine x times ln x, I can rewrite the limit as ln x divided by one over sine x.
Now as x goes to zero, my numerator is going to negative infinity.
And since sine x is going to zero through positive numbers, my denominator one over sine x is going to positive infinity.
So I have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form.
Now, I could instead choose to leave the sine x in the numerator, and instead, put a one over ln x in the denominator.
If I do this, then as x goes to zero through positive numbers, sine x goes to zero.
And since ln x goes to negative infinity, one over ln x goes to zero, and so I have a zero over zero indeterminate form.
Sometimes it can be difficult to decide which of these two ways to rewrite a product as a quotient.
One rule of thumb is to take the version that makes it easier to take the derivative of the numerator and denominator.
Another trick is just to try one of the ways and if you get stuck, go back and try the other.
I'm going to use the first method of rewriting it because I recognize that one over sine x can be written as cosecant of x and I know how to take the derivative of cosecant x using lopi towels rule On this infinity over infinity indeterminate form, I can rewrite my limit as the limit of what I get when I take the derivative of the numerator, that's one over x divided by the derivative of the denominator, that's negative cosecant x cotangent x.
As always, I want to simplify my expression before going any further, I can rewrite my trig functions in the denominator in terms of sine and cosine.
cosecant x is one over sine x.
and cotangent x is cosine of x over sine of x.
Now flipping and multiplying, I get the limit as x goes to zero plus of one over x times the sine squared of x over negative cosine of x.
In other words, the limit of negative sine squared x over x cosine x, we know that cosine of x goes to one as x goes to zero.
So I can rewrite this as the limit of negative sine squared x over x times the limit of something that goes to one.
So I once again have a zero over zero and determinant form.
And I can apply lopatok rule yet again, taking the derivative of the top, I get negative two sine x, cosine of x, and the derivative, the bottom is just one.
Now I'm in a good position just to evaluate the limit by plugging in zero for x in the numerator, I get negative two times zero times one, the denominator is just one, so my final limit is zero.
In this limit, we have a battle of forces.
As x is going to infinity, one over x is going to zero.
So one plus one over x is going to one, but the exponent x is going to infinity, it's hard to tell what's going to happen here.
If we had one, to any finite number, that would be one.
But anything slightly bigger than one, as we raise it to have bigger and bigger powers, we would expect to get infinity.
So our limit has an independent permanent form, it's hard to tell whether the answer is going to be one infinity, or maybe something in between.
Whenever I see an expression with a variable in the base, and a variable in the exponent, I'm tempted to use logarithms.
If we set y equal to one plus one over x to the x, then if I take the natural log of both sides, I can use my log roles to rewrite that by multiplying by x in the front.
Now, if I wanted to take the limit as x goes to infinity of ln y, that would be the limit of this product, x times ln one plus one over x.
As x goes to infinity, the first factor x goes to infinity.
One plus one over x goes to just one and ln one is going to zero.
So we have infinity times zero indeterminate form, which we can try to rewrite as an infinity over infinity, or a zero over zero indeterminate form.
Let's rewrite this as the limit of ln one plus one