Using Taylor Series to find Sums of Series.
to the zero are all indeterminate forms that can be handled using lobi TAs role.
In this video, we saw that a zero times infinity indeterminate form could be converted to a zero over zero, or infinity over infinity indeterminate form by rewriting f of x times g of x as f of x divided by one over g of x, or as g of x divided by one over f of x.
We also saw how to use lopi talls rule on these three sorts of indeterminate forms by taking the ln of y, where y is our f of x to the g of x that we want to take the limit of this video gives some tricks for deciding whether a sequence converges.
We say that a sequence a sub n converges, if the limit as n goes to infinity of the terms, a sub n exists as a finite number.
Otherwise, we say the sequence diverges.
In other words, a sequence diverges if the limit is infinity, or negative infinity, or does not exist.
More formally, we said the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equals L, if for any small number epsilon, there's a number capital N, such that when the index little n is bigger than or equal to capital N, a sub n is within distance epsilon of owl.
Saying that a sedan is within distance epsilon of L is the same thing as saying that the absolute value of a sub n minus L is less than epsilon.
Let me draw this as a picture.
If we put in on the x axis and a sub n on the y axis, we can plot our terms a sub n like this, here, it looks like our a sub n are settling at a particular value, I'll draw the value on the y axis and call it L.
We say that the limit of a sub n is equal to L.
Because for any tiny number epsilon, here, I've tried to draw a distance epsilon above L and a distance epsilon below, we can trap or a sub ends within epsilon of L by requiring the index and to be big enough, for the epsilon I've chosen here, are a sub ends are trapped within epsilon of L, when little n is bigger than equal to three.
So there is that big number n, which is here, like two or three, such that when little n is bigger than that the a sub n are always trapped within epsilon of L.
And if I chosen a tinier epsilon, I would just have to go a little bit farther out to make sure that my sequence was trapped within epsilon of n about this is the epsilon definition of a limit.
Formally, we say the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n is infinity.
If for any big number, omega, there's a number capital N, such that a sub n is bigger than capital N, for a little n bigger than or equal to capital N.
In other words, no matter how big an Omega I originally pick, my terms a sub n are eventually true.
Above omega.
Let me draw a picture for this one too.
My terms here again, are drawn in red.
And now if I pick a certain height omega, eventually all my turns will be above omega.
And if I pick a different, bigger value of omega, my terms will still eventually be bigger than omega, I might just need to go further out in my sequence.
For this first value of omega, I would just need to pick a capital N of about 123456.
Once my little ends are all bigger than six, my Ace events are bigger than that omega, and for this bigger value of omega, I need to pick a value of capital N of about nine, once my little ends are bigger than about nine, all my as events would be bigger than this omega.
There's a similar definition for the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equaling negative infinity.
Now we just need to say that for any big negative number, omega, there's a number.
And such that a sub n is less than omega for a little n bigger than or equal to capital N.
Please take a moment and try to come up with an example of a sequence that converges, a sequence that diverges to infinity or negative infinity, and a sequence that's bounded but still diverges.
One example of a convergent sequence is a sequence whenever n, this sequence converges to zero, since the limit as n goes to infinity of one over N is zero.
A divergent sequence is two to the N.
Since the limit as n goes to infinity of two to the n is infinity.
One example of a sequence that's bounded, but still diverges is negative one to the n.
The sequence alternates between negative one and one, depending on whether n is odd, or even.
So it's bounded in between negative one and one.
But it still diverges because the limit does not exist.
Since the sequence doesn't settle at a single value.
The rest of this video will give some techniques for proving that sequences converge.
The first technique is to use standard calculus tricks for finding limits of functions.
Even though a sequence is only defined on positive integers.
Sometimes it's possible to find a function defined on all positive real numbers that agrees with our sequence on the integers.
In other words, the terms as of n are equal to f of n for this function F.
When this happens, then if the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x equals L, then the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n also equals out, the red dots are converging to the same limit as the blue function.
So a lot of times, we can figure out if a sequence converges by replacing the terms a sub n with F of X for some appropriate function, and then using lobaton ruler, other tricks from calculus one to show that the function limit exists.
Let's try that for the following example.
When the indices are missing, as in this example, we'll assume that n starts at one and goes to infinity.
In order to prove that this sequence converges, let's instead look at the function f of x equals ln one plus two e to the x over x, where x is a real number.
Now let's look at the limit as x goes to infinity of f of x.
That's the limit as x goes to infinity of ln one plus two e to the x over x.
And as x goes to infinity in the x goes to infinity, so one plus two times e to the x goes to infinity, which means ln of that goes to infinity.
So the numerator is going to infinity as x goes to infinity.
And so as the denominator, we have an infinity over an infinity indeterminate form.
So we can apply lobby towels rule and take the derivative of the numerator over the derivative of the denominator, the derivative of the numerator one over one plus two times e to the x times two times e to the x using the chain rule, and the derivative of the denominator is just one.
We can take derivatives here, because we're thinking of x as a real number, not just an integer.
Simplifying, we still have an infinity over infinity indeterminate form.
So let's take the derivatives again, For this first value of omega, I would just need to pick a capital N of about 123456.
Once my little ends are all bigger than six, my Ace events are bigger than that omega, and for this bigger value of omega, I need to pick a value of capital N of about nine, once my little ends are bigger than about nine, all my as events would be bigger than this omega.
There's a similar definition for the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n equaling negative infinity.
Now we just need to say that for any big negative number, omega, 