Slopes of Parametric Curves.
of interesting to note that we could also rewrite this geometric sequence if we wanted to, using an index and going from zero to infinity.
And one way to figure out how to do that the are the common ratio stays the same as negative e over three.
But since this version starts at t equals three, the first term here is really minus e over three cubed times one over three squared E.
And that becomes our value of A.
Notice that when n is zero here, I get this value.
And when t is three, here, I get the same value for this sequence.
So these sequences are equivalent.
But in any case, for either a sequence, the common ratio, R is negative B over three, and a sequence converges.
Therefore, the final trick that I want to mention for deciding whether sequences converge or diverge is limit laws, the usual limit laws about addition, subtraction, and so on hold for sequences as well for functions.
So for example, if the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n is out, and the limit of b sub n is am than the limit of the sum, a sub n plus b sub n is going to be equal to L plus m.
And the limit of a sub n times b sub n is L times M.
And the limit of C times a sub n where C is some constant is going to be c times though similar roles holds for subtraction and division.
I want to emphasize that these limit holds hold under the condition that the limits of the component sequences exist as finite numbers.
I can use these limit laws to decide if this sequence converges, since the limit of the terms is equal to the difference of the limits, provided those limits exist.
Now the first limit is zero, since the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator here, and the second limit is also zero.
Since this is a geometric sequence, with ratio of four fifths, and four fifths is between zero and one.
Therefore, the limit of our original sequence must be zero.
In this video, we saw several ways to prove that a sequence converges.
We saw that we could use calculus techniques like lopi taas rule.
After replacing the sequence with its associated function defined on real numbers, we also saw that we could use the squeeze theorem.
we noted that all sequences that are bounded and monotonic must converge.
And we saw that geometric sequences always converge if r is bigger than negative one and less than or equal to one.
Finally, we saw that we can use limit laws to handle sums and products and other conglomerations of sequences.
This video is about geometric series, and when they converge, and when they diverged.
you can know that it converges if r is bigger than negative one and less than or equal to one.
This sequence here, although it looks really complicated, it's really a geometric sequence in disguise.
One way to see this is by simplifying the form of the terms, so this is negative one to the t, e to the t times e to the minus one over three to the T times three squared.
This is the same thing as negative e over three to the T times one over three squared times E.
Now this is looking like the tail end of a geometric sequence, where A is one over three squared times E, and R, the common ratio is minus e over three, say the tail end, because we have T starting at three instead of zero.
Now since he is less than three, the magnitude of our is got to be smaller than one.
In other words, our as a negative number, that's between negative one and zero, and therefore, the tail end of this geometric sequence converges.
It's kind of interesting to note that we could also rewrite this geometric sequence if we wanted to, using an index and going from zero to infinity.
And one way to figure out how to do that the are the common ratio stays the same as negative e over three.
But since this version starts at t equals three, the first term here is really minus e over three cubed times one over three squared E.
And that becomes our value of A.
Notice that when n is zero here, I get this value.
And when t is three, here, I get the same value for this sequence.
So these sequences are equivalent.
