Area under a Parametric Curve.
But in any case, for either a sequence, the common ratio, R is negative B over three, and a sequence converges.
Therefore, the final trick that I want to mention for deciding whether sequences converge or diverge is limit laws, the usual limit laws about addition, subtraction, and so on hold for sequences as well for functions.
So for example, if the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n is out, and the limit of b sub n is am than the limit of the sum, a sub n plus b sub n is going to be equal to L plus m.
And the limit of a sub n times b sub n is L times M.
And the limit of C times a sub n where C is some constant is going to be c times though similar roles holds for subtraction and division.
I want to emphasize that these limit holds hold under the condition that the limits of the component sequences exist as finite numbers.
I can use these limit laws to decide if this sequence converges, since the limit of the terms is equal to the difference of the limits, provided those limits exist.
Now the first limit is zero, since the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator here, and the second limit is also zero.
Since this is a geometric sequence, with ratio of four fifths, and four fifths is between zero and one.
Therefore, the limit of our original sequence must be zero.
In this video, we saw several ways to prove that a sequence converges.
We saw that we could use calculus techniques like lopi taas rule.
After replacing the sequence with its associated function defined on real numbers, we also saw that we could use the squeeze theorem.
we noted that all sequences that are bounded and monotonic must converge.
And we saw that geometric sequences always converge if r is bigger than negative one and less than or equal to one.
Finally, we saw that we can use limit laws to handle sums and products and other conglomerations of sequences.
This video is about geometric series, and when they converge, and when they diverged.
A geometric sequence is a sequence of the form a a times r, a times r squared, a times r cubed, and so on.
For some numbers a and r.
this can be written in the wrapped up notation, a times r to the k, where k goes from zero to infinity.
For example, if a is three, and r is one half, the sequence would be three, three halves, three fourths, three eighths, and so on, which could be written as three times one half to the k, where k ranges from zero to infinity.
A geometric series is the series you get by adding all these numbers up.
So that would be a plus a times r plus a times r squared, and so on, which can be written in summation notation is the sum from K equals zero to infinity of A times r to the K.
For our example, our series would be the following, which could be written as the sum from K equals zero to infinity of three times one half to the K.
Sometimes you might get a geometric series that's in disguise, like this one.
If I write out the first few terms, notice that we're told to start with i equals two.
So plugging in i equals two here, I get negative one, squared over three to the two times two minus three, that's one over three.
If I plug in i equals three, I get negative one cubed, that's over three to the two times three minus three, or negative one over three cubed, negative 127.
When I go four, I get one over 243.
If I look at the ratio of consecutive terms, negative 127 divided by 1/3, is negative one night.
Similarly, the ratio here is also negative one nights, suggesting that we might have a geometric series with ratio R of negative 1/9.
And first term coming from here, of 1/3.
But there's another way to see this that's less arithmetic