Integration by Parts.
in this picture, the curve is divided up into nine sub intervals.
I'll label the corresponding points on the x axis, x zero for a x 1x, two, all the way through x eight and x nine is B.
And I can label the points on my curve.
So here's the sixth point P six has x coordinates xx, and then y coordinate will be f of x x, since my curve is given by the equation y equals f of x.
More generally, I have N sub intervals.
And I'll label an arbitrary point piece of I.
The point before it is then a piece of i minus one.
And the length of the ice segment is given by the distance between P sub i and P sub i minus one.
So that's the square root of x sub i minus x sub i minus one squared plus f of x sub i minus f of x sub i minus one squared by the distance formula.
The total length of the curve can be approximated by adding the lengths of all these line segments up.
So that's the sum from i equals one to N for the N line segments of these lengths.
This is starting to look a little bit like a Riemann sum because of the Sigma sign, but it's missing the delta x That I usually have out here.
So I'm going to use a trick, I'm going to multiply each term of this expression by x sub i minus x sub i minus one divided by x sub i minus x sub i minus one.
This doesn't change the value of my expression, but it does introduce a delta x over delta x into my equation, because delta x represents the width of a sub interval.
And that's equal to x by minus x, y minus one, I'm going to suck the factor in the denominator inside the square root sign, notice I have to square it, when I pull it inside the square root sign.
Now I'm going to rewrite my fraction inside the square root sign.
Now this first fraction is just one, and the second fraction can be rewritten with a single squared sign.
And the second expression should look familiar to you.
It's the expression for the slope of a secant line.
At effects, I n x i minus one are very close to each other, the slope of that secant line is very close to the slope of a tangent line for at a point in that interval.
In fact, you might recall that the mean value theorem says that the slope of the secant line is actually exactly equal to the slope of a tangent line.
For some point, I'll call it x i star in that interval.
So I'll rewrite my expression for the approximate length of the curve.
And since x i minus x i minus one can be written as delta x, I have a Riemann sum here.
So if I want to find the exact arc length, I just need to take the limit of this Riemann sum.
This is the limit as the number of intervals goes to infinity.
We know that the limit of a Riemann sum is given by an integral.
So the arc length is given by the integral of the square root of one plus f prime of x squared dx, starting from the first x value of A to the last x value of b.
And so we've derived a formula for arc length.
Sometimes, this formula is also written with the alternative notation of dydx, instead of f prime of x.
Let's use the arc length formula to find the length of the curve y equals x to the three halves between x equals one and x equals four.
That's this section of the curve drawn.
Here's the general formula for arc length.
And since dydx, for our curve is three halves x to the one half, we get that arc length is the integral from one to four of the square root of one plus three halves x to the one half squared dx.
After simplifying a little bit, we can use use substitution to rewrite this.
So we get the integral from 13 fourths, to 10 of the square root of u times four ninths do which integrates to u to the three halves divided by three halves, times four ninths, evaluated between 10 and 13 fourths, which after some computation works out to 1/27 times at the square root of 10 minus 13, the squared of 13 or approximately 7.
6 units, which seems about right, based on the graph, taking into account the fact that this scale here is by twos on the y axis.
In this video, we found the formula for the arc length of a curve.
If the curve stretches from x equals a to x equals b, then the arc length is given by the integral from a to b of the square root of one plus f prime of x squared dx.
This video introduces the idea of work from physics and the key role of integration in doing work calculations.
If a constant force f is applied to move an object a distance d, then the work done to move the object is defined to be work equals force times distance, or in symbols, w equals F times d.
The units of force can be given in metric units, or in bold fashion, English units.
Since force is mass times acceleration, the units of force are going to be units of mass, which are kilograms, times units of acceleration, meters per second squared.
This collection of units is also called a Newton.
In English units, force is given typically, in terms of pounds.
Now the units of work since work is force times distance, and distance in metric units is in meters.
That gives units for work of kilograms meters squared per second squared, or we can write it work as Newton meters.
And these collection of units is also given its own name, which is the joule.
If we're using English units for work, work again is force times distance.
So the units become pounds times feet are usually this is written instead, as a foot pound.
Now, if I give you my weight in pounds, I weigh about 140 pounds.
Those pounds are already and I get it a force.
So that 140 pounds, my weight is also telling the force of gravity on my body.
But if I tell you instead, that my mass is 63.
5 kilograms, well, that's a unit of mass not a unit of force.
So if I want to know the force, due to gravity on my body, I'm gonna have to multiply that 63.
5 by the acceleration due to gravity, which is 9.
8 meters per second squared.
That product works out to be 622.
3 kilogram meters per second squared.
Notice that we're now have the right units for force, we could also say, that's the force of gravity on my body is 622.
3 Newtons.
Here's the general formula for arc length.
And since dydx, for our curve is three halves x to the one half, we get that arc length is the integral from one to four of the square